Quentin did a magic trick. Nobody noticed.
They picked their way along the cold, uneven sidewalk
together: James, Julia, and Quentin. James and Julia held
hands. That’s how things were now. The sidewalk wasn’t
quite wide enough, so Quentin trailed after them, like a
sulky child. He would rather have been alone with Julia, or
just alone period, but you couldn’t have everything. Or at
least the available evidence pointed overwhelmingly to that
conclusion.
“Okay!” James said over his shoulder. “Q. Let’s talk
strategy.”
James seemed to have a sixth sense for when Quentin
was starting to feel sorry for himself. Quentin’s interview
was in seven minutes. James was right after him.
“Nice firm handshake. Lots of eye contact. Then when
he’s feeling comfortable, you hit him with a chair and I’ll
break his password and e-mail Princeton.”
“Just be yourself, Q,” Julia said.
Her dark hair was pulled back in a wavy bunch.
Somehow it made it worse that she was always so nice to
him.
“How is that different from what I said?”
Quentin did the magic trick again. It was a very small
trick, a basic one-handed sleight with a nickel. He did it in
his coat pocket where nobody could see. He did it again,
then he did it backward.
“I have one guess for his password,” James said.
“Password.”
It was kind of incredible how long this had been going on,
Quentin thought. They were only seventeen, but he felt likehe’d known James and Julia forever. The school systems in
Brooklyn sorted out the gifted ones and shoved them
together, then separated the ridiculously brilliant ones from
the merely gifted ones and shoved them together, and as a
result they’d been bumping into each other in the same
speaking contests and regional Latin exams and tiny,
specially convened ultra-advanced math classes since
elementary school. The nerdiest of the nerds. By now, their
senior year, Quentin knew James and Julia better than he
knew anybody else in the world, not excluding his parents,
and they knew him. Everybody knew what everybody else
was going to say before they said it. Everybody who was
going to sleep with anybody else had already done it. Julia
—pale, freckled, dreamy Julia, who played the oboe and
knew even more physics than he did—was never going to
sleep with Quentin.
Quentin was thin and tall, though he habitually hunched
his shoulders in a vain attempt to brace himself against
whatever blow was coming from the heavens, and which
would logically hit the tall people first. His shoulder-length
hair was freezing in clumps. He should have stuck around
to dry it after gym, especially with his interview today, but for
some reason—maybe he was in a self-sabotaging mood—
he hadn’t. The low gray sky threatened snow. It seemed to
Quentin like the world was offering up special little tableaux
of misery just for him: crows perched on power lines,
stepped-in dog shit, windblown trash, the corpses of
innumerable wet oak leaves being desecrated in
innumerable ways by innumerable vehicles and
pedestrians.
“God, I’m full,” James said. “I ate too much. Why do I
always eat too much?”
“Because you’re a greedy pig?” Julia said brightly.
“Because you’re tired of being able to see your feet?
Because you’re trying to make your stomach touch your
penis?”
James put his hands behind his head, his fingers in hiswavy chestnut hair, his camel cashmere coat wide open to
the November cold, and belched mightily. Cold never
bothered him. Quentin felt cold all the time, like he was
trapped in his own private individual winter.
James sang, to a tune somewhere between “Good King
Wenceslas” and “Bingo”:
In olden times there was a boy
Young and strong and brave-o
He wore a sword and rode a horse
And his name was Dave-o . . .
“God!” Julia shrieked. “Stop!”
James had written this song five years ago for a middle-
school talent show skit. He still liked to sing it; by now they
all knew it by heart. Julia shoved him, still singing, into a
garbage can, and when that didn’t work she snatched off
his watch cap and started beating him over the head with it.
“My hair! My beautiful interview hair!”
King James, Quentin thought. Le roi s’amuse.
“I hate to break up the party,” he said, “but we’ve got like
two minutes.”
“Oh dear, oh dear!” Julia twittered. “The duchess! We
shall be quite late!”
I should be happy, Quentin thought. I’m young and alive
and healthy. I have good friends. I have two reasonably
intact parents—viz., Dad, an editor of medical textbooks,
and Mom, a commercial illustrator with ambitions, thwarted,
of being a painter. I am a solid member of the middle-
middle class. My GPA is a number higher than most people
even realize it is possible for a GPA to be.
But walking along Fifth Avenue in Brooklyn, in his black
overcoat and his gray interview suit, Quentin knew he
wasn’t happy. Why not? He had painstakingly assembled
all the ingredients of happiness. He had performed all the
necessary rituals, spoken the words, lit the candles, madethe sacrifices. But happiness, like a disobedient spirit,
refused to come. He couldn’t think what else to do.
He followed James and Julia past bodegas,
laundromats, hipster boutiques, cell-phone stores limned
with neon piping, past a bar where old people were already
drinking at three forty-five in the afternoon, past a brown-
brick Veterans of Foreign Wars hall with plastic patio
furniture on the sidewalk in front of it. All of it just confirmed
his belief that his real life, the life he should be living, had
been mislaid through some clerical error by the cosmic
bureaucracy. This couldn’t be it. It had been diverted
somewhere else, to somebody else, and he’d been issued
this shitty substitute faux life instead.
Maybe his real life would turn up in Princeton. He did the
trick with the nickel in his pocket again.
“Are you playing with your wang, Quentin?” James
asked.
Quentin blushed.
“I am not playing with my wang.”
“Nothing to be ashamed of.” James clapped him on the
shoulder. “Clears the mind.”
The wind bit through the thin material of Quentin’s
interview suit, but he refused to button his overcoat. He let
the cold blow through it. It didn’t matter, he wasn’t really
there anyway.
He was in Fillory.
Christopher Plover’s Fillory and Further is a series of five
novels published in England in the 1930s. They describe
the adventures of the five Chatwin children in a magical
land that they discover while on holiday in the countryside
with their eccentric aunt and uncle. They aren’t really onholiday, of course—their father is up to his hips in mud and
blood at Passchendaele, and their mother has been
hospitalized with a mysterious illness that is probably
psychological in nature, which is why they’ve been hastily
packed off to the country for safekeeping.
But all that unhappiness takes place far in the
background. In the foreground, every summer for three
years, the children leave their various boarding schools and
return to Cornwall, and each time they do they find their way
into the secret world of Fillory, where they have adventures
and explore magical lands and defend the gentle creatures
who live there against the various forces that menace them.
The strangest and most persistent of those enemies is a
veiled figure known only as the Watcherwoman, whose
horological enchantments threaten to stall time itself,
trapping all of Fillory at five o’clock on a particularly dreary,
drizzly afternoon in late September.
Like most people Quentin read the Fillory books in grade
school. Unlike most people—unlike James and Julia—he
never got over them. They were where he went when he
couldn’t deal with the real world, which was a lot. (The
Fillory books were both a consolation for Julia not loving
him and also probably a major reason why she didn’t.) And
it was true, there was a strong whiff of the English nursery
about them, and he felt secretly embarrassed when he got
to the parts about the Cozy Horse, an enormous,
affectionate equine creature who trots around Fillory by
night on velvet hooves, and whose back is so broad you
can sleep on it.
But there was a more seductive, more dangerous truth to
Fillory that Quentin couldn’t let go of. It was almost like the
Fillory books—especially the first one, The World in the
Walls —were about reading itself. When the oldest
Chatwin, melancholy Martin, opens the cabinet of the
grandfather clock that stands in a dark, narrow back
hallway in his aunt’s house and slips through into Fillory
(Quentin always pictured him awkwardly pushing aside thependulum, like the uvula of a monstrous throat), it’s like he’s
opening the covers of a book, but a book that did what
books always promised to do and never actually quite did:
get you out, really out, of where you were and into
somewhere better.
The world Martin discovers in the walls of his aunt’s
house is a world of magical twilight, a landscape as black
and white and stark as a printed page, with prickly
stubblefields and rolling hills crisscrossed by old stone
walls. In Fillory there’s an eclipse every day at noon, and
seasons can last for a hundred years. Bare trees scratch at
the sky. Pale green seas lap at narrow white beaches
made of broken shells. In Fillory things mattered in a way
they didn’t in this world. In Fillory you felt the appropriate
emotions when things happened. Happiness was a real,
actual, achievable possibility. It came when you called. Or
no, it never left you in the first place.
They stood on the sidewalk in front of the house. The
neighborhood was fancier here, with wide sidewalks and
overhanging trees. The house was brick, the only
unattached residential structure in a neighborhood of row
houses and brownstones. It was locally famous for having
played a role in the bloody, costly Battle of Brooklyn. It
seemed to gently reproach the cars and streetlights around
it with memories of its gracious Old Dutch past.
If this were a Fillory novel—Quentin thought, just for the
record—the house would contain a secret gateway to
another world. The old man who lived there would be kindly
and eccentric and drop cryptic remarks, and then when his
back was turned Quentin would stumble on a mysterious
cabinet or an enchanted dumbwaiter or whatever, through
which he would gaze with wild surmise on the clean breast
of another world.
But this wasn’t a Fillory novel.“So,” Julia said. “Give ’em Hades.”
She wore a blue serge coat with a round collar that made
her look like a French schoolgirl.
“See you at the library maybe.”
“Cheers.”
They bumped fists. She dropped her gaze,
embarrassed. She knew how he felt, and he knew she
knew, and there was nothing more to say about it. He
waited, pretending to be fascinated by a parked car, while
she kissed James good-bye—she put a hand on his chest
and kicked up her heel like an old-timey starlet—then he
and James walked slowly up the cement path to the front
door.
James put his arm around Quentin’s shoulders.
“I know what you think, Quentin,” he said gruffly. Quentin
was taller, but James was broader, more solidly built, and
he pulled Quen tin off balance. “You think nobody
understands you. But I do.” He squeezed Quentin’s
shoulder in an almost fatherly way. “I’m the only one who
does.”
Quentin said nothing. You could envy James, but you
couldn’t hate him, because along with being handsome and
smart he was also, at heart, kind and good. More than
anybody else Quentin had ever met, James reminded him
of Martin Chatwin. But if James was a Chatwin, what did
that make Quentin? The real problem with being around
James was that he was always the hero. And what did that
make you? Either the sidekick or the villain.
Quentin rang the doorbell. A soft, tinny clatter erupted
somewhere in the depths of the darkened house. An old-
fashioned, analog ring. He rehearsed a mental list of his
extracurriculars, personal goals, etc. He was absolutely
prepared for this interview in every possible way, except
maybe his incompletely dried hair, but now that the ripened
fruit of all that preparation was right in front of him hesuddenly lost any desire for it. He wasn’t surprised. He was
used to this anticlimactic feeling, where by the time you’ve
done all the work to get something you don’t even want it
anymore. He had it all the time. It was one of the few things
he could depend on.
The doorway was guarded by a depressingly ordinary
suburban screen door. Orange and purple zinnias were still
blooming, against all horticultural logic, in a random scatter
pattern in black earth beds on either side of the doorstep.
How weird, Quentin thought, with no curiosity at all, that they
would still be alive in November. He withdrew his ungloved
hands into the sleeves of his coat and placed the ends of
the sleeves under his arms. Even though it felt cold enough
to snow, somehow it began to rain.
It was still raining five minutes later. Quentin knocked on
the door again, then pushed lightly. It opened a crack, and a
wave of warm air tumbled out. The warm, fruity smell of a
stranger’s house.
“Hello?” Quentin called. He and James exchanged
glances. He pushed the door all the way open.
“Better give him another minute.”
“Who even does this in their spare time?” Quentin said. “I
bet he’s a pedophile.”
The foyer was dark and silent and muffled with Oriental
rugs. Still outside, James leaned on the doorbell. No one
answered.
“I don’t think anybody’s here,” Quentin said. That James
wasn’t coming inside suddenly made him want to go inside
more. If the interviewer actually turned out to be a
gatekeeper to the magical land of Fillory, he thought, it was
too bad he wasn’t wearing more practical shoes.
A staircase went up. On the left was a stiff, unused-
looking dining room, on the right a cozy den with leather
armchairs and a carved, man-size wooden cabinet
standing by itself in a corner. Interesting. An old nauticalmap taller than he was took up half of one wall, with an
ornately barbed compass rose. He massaged the walls in
search of a light switch. There was a cane chair in one
corner, but he didn’t sit.
All the blinds were drawn. The quality of the darkness
was less like a house with the curtains drawn than it was
like actual night, as if the sun had set or been eclipsed the
moment he crossed the threshold. Quen tin slow-motion-
walked into the den. He’d go back outside and call. In
another minute. He had to at least look. The darkness was
like a prickling electric cloud around him.
The cabinet was enormous, so big you could climb into it.
He placed his hand on its small, dinged brass knob. It was
unlocked. His fingers trembled. Le roi s’amuse . He couldn’t
help himself. It felt like the world was revolving around him,
like his whole life had been leading up to this moment.
It was a liquor cabinet. A big one, there was practically a
whole bar in there. Quentin reached back past the ranks of
softly jingling bottles and felt the dry, scratchy plywood at
the back just to make sure. Solid. Nothing magical about it.
He closed the door, breathing hard, his face burning in the
darkness. It was when he looked around to make absolutely
sure that nobody was watching that he saw the dead body
on the floor.
Fifteen minutes later the foyer was full of people and
activity. Quentin sat in a corner, in the cane chair, like a
pallbearer at the funeral of somebody he’d never met. He
kept the back of his skull pressed firmly against the cool
solid wall like it was his last point of connection to a same
reality. James stood next to him. He didn’t seem to know
where to put his hands. They didn’t look at each other.
The old man lay flat on his back on the floor. His stomach
was a sizable round hump, his hair a crazy gray Einsteinhalf-noggin. Three paramedics crouched around him, two
men and a woman. The woman was disarmingly, almost
inappropriately pretty—she looked out of place in that grim
scene, miscast. The paramedics were at work, but it wasn’t
the high-speed clinical blitz of an emergency life-saving
treatment. This was the other kind, the obligatory failed
resuscitation. They were murmuring in low voices, packing
up, ripping off adhesive patches, discarding contaminated
sharps in a special container.
With a practiced, muscular movement one of the men de-
intubated the corpse. The old man’s mouth was open, and
Quentin could see his dead gray tongue. He smelled
something that he didn’t want to admit was the faint, bitter
odor of shit.
“This is bad,” James said, not for the first time.
“Yes,” Quentin said thickly. “Extremely bad.” His lips and
teeth felt numb.
If he didn’t move, nobody could involve him in this any
further. He tried to breathe slowly and keep still. He stared
straight ahead, refusing to focus his eyes on what was
happening in the den. He knew if he looked at James he
would only see his own mental state reflected back at him
in an infinite corridor of panic that led nowhere. He
wondered when it would be all right for them to leave. He
couldn’t get rid of a feeling of shame that he was the one
who went into the house uninvited, as if that had somehow
caused the man’s death.
“I shouldn’t have called him a pedophile,” Quentin said
out loud. “That was wrong.”
“Extremely wrong,” James agreed. They spoke slowly,
like they were both trying out language for the very first time.
One of the paramedics, the woman, stood up from where
she was squatting by the body. Quentin watched her
stretch, heels of her hands pressed to her lumbar region,
tipping her head one way, then the other. Then she walkedover in their direction, stripping off rubber gloves.
“Well,” she announced cheerfully, “he’s dead!” By her
accent she was English.
Quentin cleared his clotted throat. The woman chucked
the gloves neatly into the trash from across the room.
“What happened to him?”
“Cerebral hemorrhage. Nice quick way to go, if you have
to go. Which he did. He must have been a drinker.”
She made the drinky-drinky gesture.
Her cheeks were flushed from crouching down over the
body. She might have been twenty-five at most, and she
wore a dark blue short-sleeved button-down shirt, neatly
pressed, with one button that didn’t match: a stewardess on
the connecting flight to hell. Quentin wished she weren’t so
attractive. Unpretty women were so much easier to deal
with in some ways—you didn’t have to face the pain of their
probable unattainability. But she was not unpretty. She was
pale and thin and unreasonably lovely, with a broad,
ridiculously sexy mouth.
“Well.” Quentin didn’t know what to say. “I’m sorry.”
“Why are you sorry?” she said. “Did you kill him?”
“I’m just here for an interview. He did alumni interviews
for Princeton.”
“So why do you care?”
Quentin hesitated. He wondered if he’d misunderstood
the premise of this conversation. He stood up, which he
should have done when she first came over anyway. He
was much taller than her. Even under the circumstances, he
thought, this person is carrying around a lot of attitude for a
paramedic. It’s not like she’s a real doctor or anything. He
wanted to scan her chest for a name tag but didn’t want to
get caught looking at her breasts.
“I don’t actually care about him, personally,” Quentin saidcarefully, “but I do place a certain value on human life in the
abstract. So even though I didn’t know him, I think I can say
that I’m sorry that he’s dead.”
“What if he was a monster? Maybe he really was a
pedophile.”
She’d overheard him.
“Maybe. Maybe he was a nice guy. Maybe he was a
saint.”
“Maybe.”
“You must spend a lot of time around dead people.” Out
of the corner of his eye he was vaguely aware that James
was watching this exchange, baffled.
“Well, you’re supposed to keep them alive. Or that’s what
they tell us.”
“It must be hard.”
“The dead ones are a lot less trouble.”
“Quieter.”
“Exactly.”
The look in her eyes didn’t quite match what she was
saying. She was studying him.
“Listen,” James cut in. “We should probably go.”
“What’s your hurry?” she said. Her eyes hadn’t left
Quentin’s. Unlike practically everybody, she seemed more
interested in him than in James. “Listen, I think this guy
might have left something for you.”
She picked up two manila envelopes, document-size, off
a marble-topped side table. Quentin frowned.
“I don’t think so.”
“We should probably go,” James said.
“You said that already,” the paramedic said.James opened the door. The cold air was a pleasant
shock. It felt real. That was what Quentin needed: more
reality. Less of this, whatever this was.
“Seriously,” the woman said. “I think you should take
these. It might be important.”
Her eyes wouldn’t leave Quentin’s face. The day had
gone still around them. It was chilly on the stoop, and
getting a little damp, and he was roughly ten yards away
from a corpse.
“Listen, we’re gonna go,” James was saying. “Thanks.
I’m sure you did everything you could.”
The pretty paramedic’s dark hair was in two heavy ropes
of braid. She wore a shiny yellow enamel ring and some
kind of fancy silver antique wristwatch. Her nose and chin
were tiny and pointy. She was a pale, skinny, pretty angel of
death, and she held two manila envelopes with their names
on them in block Magic Marker letters. Probably transcripts,
confidential recommendations. For some reason, maybe
just because he knew James wouldn’t, Quentin took the
one with his name on it.
“All right! Good-bye!” the paramedic sang. She twirled
back into the house and closed the door. They were alone
on the stoop.
“Well,” James said. He inhaled through his nose and
breathed out firmly.
Quentin nodded, as if he were agreeing with something
James had said. Slowly they walked back up the path to the
sidewalk. He still felt dazed. He didn’t especially want to
talk to James.
“Listen,” James said. “You probably shouldn’t have that.”
“I know,” Quentin said.
“You could still put it back, you know. I mean, what if they
found out?”“How would they find out?”
“I don’t know.”
“Who knows what’s in here? Could come in useful.”
“Yeah, well, lucky thing that guy died then!” James said
irritably.
They walked to the end of the block without speaking,
annoyed at each other and not wanting to admit it. The slate
sidewalk was wet, and the sky was white with rain. Quentin
knew he probably shouldn’t have taken the envelope. He
was pissed at himself for taking it and pissed at James for
not taking his.
“Look, I’ll see you later,” James said. “I gotta go meet
Jules at the library.”
“Right.”
They shook hands formally. It felt strangely final. Quentin
walked away slowly down First Street. A man had died in
the house he just left. He was still in a dream. He realized—
more shame—that underneath it all he was relieved that he
didn’t have to do his Princeton interview today after all.
The day was darkening. The sun was setting already
behind the gray shell of cloud that covered Brooklyn. For
the first time in an hour he thought about all the things he
had left to do today: physics problem set, history paper, e-
mail, dishes, laundry. The weight of them was dragging him
back down the gravity well of the ordinary world. He would
have to explain to his parents what happened, and they
would, in some way he could never grasp, and therefore
could never properly rebut, make him feel like it was his
fault. It would all go back to normal. He thought of Julia and
James meeting at the library. She would be working on her
Western Civ paper for Mr. Karras, a six-week project she
would complete in two sleepless days and nights. As
ardently as he wished that she were his, and not James’s,
he could never quite imagine how he would win her. In the
most plausible of his many fantasies James died,unexpectedly and painlessly, leaving Julia behind to sink
softly weeping into his arms.
As he walked Quentin unwound the little red-threaded
clasp that held shut the manila envelope. He saw
immediately that it wasn’t his transcript, or an official
document of any kind. The envelope held a notebook. It
was old-looking, its corners squashed and rubbed till they
were smooth and round, its cover foxed.
The first page, handwritten in ink, read:
The Magicians
Book Six of Fillory and Further
The ink had gone brown with age. The Magicians was not
the name of any book by Christopher Plover that Quentin
knew of. And any good nerd knew that there were only five
books in the Fillory series.
When he turned the page a piece of white notepaper,
folded over once, flew out and slipped away on the wind. It
clung to a wrought-iron area fence for a second before the
wind whipped it away again.
There was a community garden on the block, a triangular
snippet of land too narrow and weirdly shaped to be
snapped up by developers. With its ownership a black hole
of legal ambiguity, it had been taken over years ago by a
collective of enterprising neighbors who had trucked out the
acid sand native to Brooklyn and replaced it with rich, fertile
loam from upstate. For a while they’d raised pumpkins and
tomatoes and spring bulbs and raked out little Japanese
serenity gardens, but lately they’d neglected it, and hardy
urban weeds had taken root instead. They were running riot
and strangling their frailer, more exotic competitors. It was
into this tangled thicket that the note flew and disappeared.
This late in the year all the plants were dead or dying,
even the weeds, and Quentin waded into them hip-deep,
dry stems catching on his pants, his leather shoes
crunching brown broken glass. It crossed his mind that thenote might just possibly contain the hot paramedic’s phone
number. The garden was narrow, but it went surprisingly far
back. There were three or four sizable trees in it, and the
farther in he pushed the darker and more overgrown it got.
He caught a glimpse of the note, up high, plastered
against a trellis encrusted with dead vines. It could clear the
back fence before he caught up with it. His phone rang: his
dad. Quentin ignored it. Out of the corner of his eye he
thought he saw something flit past behind the bracken,
large and pale, but when he turned his head it was gone.
He pushed past the corpses of gladiolas, petunias,
shoulder-high sunflowers, rosebushes—brittle, stiff stems
and flowers frozen in death into ornate toile patterns.
He would have thought he’d gone all the way through to
Seventh Avenue by now. He shoved his way even deeper
in, brushing up against who knew what toxic flora. A case of
poison fucking ivy, that’s all he needed now. It was odd to
see that here and there among the dead plants a few vital
green stalks still poked up, drawing sustenance from who
knew where. He caught a whiff of something sweet in the
air.
He stopped. All of a sudden it was quiet. No car horns,
no stereos, no sirens. His phone had stopped ringing. It
was bitter cold, and his fingers were numb. Turn back or go
on? He squeezed farther in through a hedge, closing his
eyes and squinching up his face against the scratchy twigs.
He stumbled over something, an old stone. He felt suddenly
nauseous. He was sweating.
When he opened his eyes again he was standing on the
edge of a huge, wide, perfectly level green lawn surrounded
by trees. The smell of ripe grass was overpowering. There
was hot sun on his face.
The sun was at the wrong angle. And where the hell were
the clouds? The sky was a blinding blue. His inner ear spun
sickeningly. He held his breath for a few seconds, then
expelled freezing winter air from his lungs and breathed in
warm summer air in its place. It was thick with floatingpollen. He sneezed.
In the middle distance beyond the wide lawn a large
house stood, all honey-colored stone and gray slate,
adorned with chimneys and gables and towers and roofs
and sub-roofs. In the center, over the main house, was a
tall, stately clock tower that struck even Quentin as an odd
addition to what otherwise looked like a private residence.
The clock was in the Venetian style: a single barbed hand
circling a face with twenty-four hours marked on it in Roman
numerals. Over one wing rose what looked like the green
oxidized-copper dome of an observatory. Between house
and lawn was a series of inviting landscaped terraces and
spinneys and hedges and fountains.
Quentin was pretty sure that if he stood very still for a few
seconds everything would snap back to normal. He
wondered if he was undergoing some dire neurological
event. He looked cautiously back over his shoulder. There
was no sign of the garden behind him, just some big leafy
oak trees, the advance guard of what looked like a pretty
serious forest. A rill of sweat ran down his rib cage from his
left armpit. It was hot.
Quentin dropped his bag on the turf and shrugged out of
his overcoat. A bird chirped languidly in the silence. Fifty
feet away a tall skinny teenager was leaning against a tree,
smoking a cigarette and watching him.
He looked about Quentin’s age. He wore a button-down
shirt with a sharp collar and very thin, very pale pink stripes.
He didn’t look at Quen tin, just dragged on his cigarette and
exhaled into the summer air. The heat didn’t seem to bother
him.
“Hey,” Quentin called.
Now he looked over. He raised his chin at Quentin, once,
but didn’t answer.
Quentin walked over, as nonchalantly as he could. He
really didn’t want to look like somebody who had no ideawhat was going on. Even without his coat on he was
sweating like a bastard. He felt like an overdressed English
explorer trying to impress a skeptical tropical native. But
there was something he had to ask.
“Is this—?” Quentin cleared his throat. “So is this Fillory?”
He squinted against the bright sun.
The young man looked at Quentin very seriously. He took
another long drag on his cigarette, then he shook his head
slowly, blowing out the smoke.
“Nope,” he said. “Upstate New York.”BRAKEBILLS
He didn’t laugh. Quentin would appreciate that later.
“Upstate?” Quentin said. “What, like Vassar?”
“I saw you come through,” the young man said. “Come
on, you need to go up to the House.”
He snapped the cigarette away and set off across the
wide lawn. He didn’t look back to see if Quentin was
following, which at first Quentin didn’t, but then a sudden
fear of being left alone in this place got him moving and he
trotted to catch up.
The green was enormous, the size of half a dozen
football fields. It seemed to take them forever to get across
it. The sun beat on the back of Quentin’s neck.
“So what’s your name?” the young man asked, in a tone
that made sure Quentin knew that he had no interest in the
answer.
“Quentin.”
“Charming. From?”
“Brooklyn.”
“How old?”
“Seventeen.”
“I’m Eliot. Don’t tell me anything else, I don’t want to
know. Don’t want to get attached.”
Quentin had to take a couple of double-time steps to
keep up with Eliot. There was something off about Eliot’s
face. His posture was very straight, but his mouth was
twisted to one side, in a permanent half grimace that
revealed a nest of teeth sticking both in and out at
improbable angles. He looked like a child who had been
slightly misdelivered, with some subpar forceps handling bythe attending.
But despite his odd appearance Eliot had an air of
effortless self-possession that made Quentin urgently want
to be his friend, or maybe just be him period. He was
obviously one of those people who felt at home in the world
—he was naturally buoyant, where Quentin felt like he had
to dog-paddle constantly, exhaustingly, humiliatingly, just to
get one sip of air.
“So what is this place?” Quentin asked. “Do you live
here?”
“You mean here at Brakebills?” he said airily. “Yes, I
guess I do.” They had reached the far side of the grass. “If
you can call it living.”
Eliot led Quentin through a gap in a tall hedge and into a
leafy, shadowy labyrinth. The bushes had been trimmed
precisely into narrow, branching, fractally ramifying
corridors that periodically opened out onto small shady
alcoves and courtyards. The shrubbery was so dense that
no light penetrated through it, but here and there a heavy
yellow stripe of sun fell across the path from above. They
passed a plashing fountain here, a somber, rain-ravaged
white stone statue there.
It was a good five minutes before they stepped out of the
maze, through an opening flanked by two towering topiary
bears reared up on their hind legs, onto a stone terrace in
the shadow of the large house Quentin had seen from a
distance. A breeze made one of the tall, leafy bears seem
to turn its head slightly in his direction.
“The Dean will probably be down to get you in another
minute,” Eliot said. “Here’s my advice. Sit there”—he
pointed to a weathered stone bench, like he was telling an
overly affectionate dog to stay—“and try to look like you
belong here. And if you tell him you saw me smoking, I will
banish you to the lowest circle of hell. Which I’ve never been
there, but if even half of what I hear is true it’s almost as bad
as Brooklyn.”Eliot disappeared back into the hedge maze, and
Quentin sat down obediently on the bench. He stared down
between his shiny black interview shoes at the gray stone
tiles, his backpack and his overcoat in his lap. This is
impossible, he thought lucidly; he thought the words in his
mind, but they got no purchase on the world around him. He
felt like he was having a not-unpleasant drug experience.
The tiles were intricately carved with a pattern of twiny
vines, or possibly elaborately calligraphic words that had
been worn away into illegibility. Little motes and seeds
drifted around in the sunlight. If this is a hallucination, he
thought, it’s pretty damn hi-res.
The silence was the strangest part of it. As hard as he
listened he couldn’t hear a single car. It felt like he was in a
movie where the sound track had abruptly cut out.
A pair of French doors rattled a few times and then
opened. A tall, fat man wearing a seersucker suit strode out
onto the terrace.
“Good afternoon,” he said. “You would be Quentin
Coldwater.”
He spoke very correctly, as if he wished he had an
English accent but wasn’t quite pretentious enough to affect
one. He had a mild, open face and thin blond hair.
“Yes, sir.” Quentin had never called an adult—or anybody
else—sir in his life, but it suddenly felt appropriate.
“Welcome to Brakebills College,” the man said. “I
suppose you’ve heard of us?”
“Actually no,” Quentin said.
“Well, you’ve been offered a Preliminary Examination
here. Do you accept?”
Quentin didn’t know what to say. This wasn’t one of the
questions he’d prepped for when he got up this morning.
“I don’t know,” he said, blinking. “I mean, I guess I’m not
sure.”“Perfectly understandable response, but not an
acceptable one, I’m afraid. I need a yes or a no. It’s just for
the Exam,” he added helpfully.
Quentin had a powerful intuition that if he said no, all of
this would be over before the syllable was even fully out of
his mouth, and he would be left standing in the cold rain and
dog shit of First Street wondering why he’d seemed to feel
the warmth of the sun on the back of his neck for a second
just then. He wasn’t ready for that. Not yet.
“Sure, okay,” he said, not wanting to sound too eager.
“Yeah.”
“Splendid.” He was one of those superficially jolly people
whose jolliness didn’t quite reach all the way up to his eyes.
“Let’s get you Examined. My name is Henry Fogg—no
jokes please, I’ve heard them all—and you may address
me as Dean. Follow me. You’re the last one to arrive, I
think,” he added.
No jokes actually came to Quentin’s mind. Inside the
house it was hushed and cool, and there was a rich, spicy
smell in the air of books and Oriental carpets and old wood
and tobacco. The Dean walked ahead of him impatiently. It
took Quentin a minute for his eyes to adjust. They hurried
through a sitting room hung with murky oil paintings, down a
narrow wood-paneled hallway, then up several flights of
stairs to a heavy-timbered wooden door.
The instant it opened hundreds of eyes flicked up and
fixed themselves on Quentin. The room was long and airy
and full of individual wooden desks arranged in rows. At
each desk sat a serious-looking teenager. It was a
classroom, but not the kind Quentin was used to, where the
walls were cinder block and covered with bulletin boards
and posters with kittens hanging from branches with HANG
IN THERE, BABY under them in balloon letters. The walls of
this room were old stone. It was full of sunlight, and it
stretched back and back and back. It looked like a trick
with mirrors.Most of the kids were Quentin’s age and appeared to
occupy his same general stratum of coolness or lack
thereof. But not all. There were a few punks with mohawks
or shaved heads, and there was a substantial goth
contingent and one of those super Jews, a Hasid. A too-tall
girl with too-big red-framed glasses beamed goofily at
everybody. A few of the younger girls looked like they’d
been crying. One kid had no shirt on and green and red
tattoos all over his back. Jesus, Quentin thought, whose
parents would let them do that? Another was in a motorized
wheelchair. Another was missing his left arm. He wore a
dark button-down shirt with one sleeve folded up and held
closed with a silver clasp.
All the desks were identical, and on each one an ordinary
blank blue test booklet was laid out with a very thin, very
sharp No. 3 pencil next to it. It was the first thing Quentin
had seen here that was familiar. There was one empty
seat, toward the back of the room, and he sat down and
scooched his chair forward with a deafening screech. He
almost thought he saw Julia’s face in among the crowd, but
she turned away almost immediately, and anyway there
was no time. At the front of the room Dean Fogg cleared
his throat primly.
“All right,” he said. “A few preliminaries. There will be
silence during the Examination. You are free to look at
other students’ papers, but you will find that they appear to
you to be blank. Your pencils will not require additional
sharpening. If you would like a glass of water, just hold up
three fingers above your head, like this.” He demonstrated.
“Do not worry about feeling unprepared for the
Examination. There is no way to study for it, though it would
be equally true to say that you have been preparing for it
your whole lives. There are only two possible grades, Pass
and Fail. If you pass, you will proceed to the second stage
of the Examination. If you fail, and most of you will, you will
be returned to your homes with a plausible alibi and very
little memory of this entire experience.“The duration of the test is two and one half hours.
Begin.”
The Dean turned to the blackboard and drew a clock
face on it. Quen tin looked down at the blank booklet on his
desk. It was no longer blank. It was filling with questions; the
letters literally swam into being on the paper as he
watched.
The room filled with a collective rustling of paper, like a
flock of birds taking off. Heads bowed in unison. Quentin
recognized this motion. It was the motion of a bunch of
high-powered type-A test killers getting down to their
bloody work.
That was all right. He was one of them.
Quentin hadn’t planned on spending the rest of his
afternoon—or morning, or whatever this was—taking a
standardized test on an unknown subject, at an unknown
educational institution, in some unknown alternate climatic
zone where it was still summer. He was supposed to be in
Brooklyn freezing his ass off and being interviewed by
some random senior citizen, currently deceased. But the
logic of his immediate circumstances was overwhelming
his other concerns, however well founded they might be. He
had never been one to argue with logic.
A lot of the test was calculus, pretty basic stuff for
Quentin, who was so mysteriously good at math that his
high school had been forced to outsource that part of his
education to Brooklyn College. Nothing more hazardous
than some fancy differential geometry and a few linear
algebra proofs. But there were more exotic questions, too.
Some of them seemed totally pointless. One of them
showed him the back of a playing card—not an actual card
but a drawing of the back of a playing card, mind you,
featuring your standard twin angels riding bicycles—andasked him to guess what card it was. How did that make
sense?
Or later on the test gave him a passage from The
Tempest, then asked him to make up a fake language, and
then translate the Shakespeare into the made-up language.
He was then asked questions about the grammar and
orthography of his made-up language, and then—honestly,
what was the point?—questions about the made-up
geography and culture and society of the made-up country
where his made-up language was so fluently spoken. Then
he had to translate the original passage from the fake
language back into English, paying particular attention to
any resulting distortions in grammar, word choice, and
meaning. Seriously. He always gave everything he had on
tests, but in this case he wasn’t totally sure what he was
supposed to give.
The test also changed as he took it. The reading-
comprehension section showed him a paragraph that
vanished as he read it, then quizzed him on its contents.
Some new kind of computerized paper—hadn’t he read
somewhere that somebody was working on that? Digital
ink? Amazing resolution, though. He was asked to draw a
rabbit that wouldn’t keep still as he drew it—as soon as it
had paws it scratched itself luxuriously and then went
hopping off around the page, nibbling at the other
questions, so that he had to chase it with the pencil to finish
filling in the fur. He wound up pacifying it with some hastily
sketched radishes and then drawing a fence around it to
keep it in line.
Soon he forgot about everything else except putting a
satisfactory chunk of his neat handwriting next to one
question after another, appeasing whatever perverse
demands the test made on him. It was an hour before he
even looked up from his desk. His ass hurt. He shifted in
his chair. The patches of sunlight from the windows had
moved.
Something else had changed, too. When he’d startedevery single desk had been filled, but now there was a
sprinkling of empty ones. He hadn’t noticed anybody
leaving. A cold crystal seed of doubt formed in Quentin’s
stomach. Jesus, they must have finished already. He wasn’t
used to being outclassed in the classroom. The palms of
his hands prickled with sweat, and he smeared them along
his thighs. Who were these people?
When Quentin flipped to the next page of the test booklet
it was blank except for a single word in the center of the
page: FIN, in swirly italic type, like at the end of an old
movie.
He sat back in the chair and pressed the heels of his
aching hands against his aching eyes. Well, that was two
hours of his life he’d never get back. Quentin still hadn’t
noticed anybody getting up and walking out, but the room
was getting seriously depopulated. There were maybe fifty
kids left, and more empty desks than full ones. It was like
they were softly and silently slipping out of the room every
time he turned his head. The punk with the tattoos and no
shirt was still there. He must have finished, or given up,
because he was dicking around by ordering more and
more glasses of water. His desktop was crowded with
glasses. Quentin spent the last twenty minutes staring out
the window and practicing a spinning trick with his pencil.
The Dean came in again and addressed the room.
“I’m delighted to inform you all that you will be moving on
to the next stage of testing,” he said. “This stage will be
conducted on an individual basis by members of the
Brakebills faculty. In the meantime, you may enjoy some
refreshment and converse among yourselves.”
Quentin counted only twenty-two desks still occupied,
maybe a tenth of the original group. Bizarrely, a silent,
comically correct butler in white gloves entered and began
circulating through the room. He gave each of them a
wooden tray with a sandwich—roasted red peppers and
very fresh mozza rella on sourdough bread—a lumpy pear,and a thick square of dark, bitter chocolate. He poured
each student a glass of something cloudy and fizzy from an
individual bottle without a label. It turned out to be grapefruit
soda.
Quentin took his lunch and drifted up to the front row,
where most of the rest of the test takers were gathering. He
felt pathetically relieved to have gotten this far, even though
he had no idea why he’d passed and the others had failed,
or what he’d get for passing. The butler was patiently
loading the clinking, sloshing collection of water glasses
from the punk’s desk onto a tray. Quentin looked for Julia,
but either she hadn’t made the cut or she’d never been
there in the first place.
“They should have capped it,” explained the punk, who
said his name was Penny. He had a gentle moony face that
was at odds with his otherwise terrifying appearance. “How
much water you can ask for. Like maybe five glasses at
most. I love finding shit like that, where the system screws
itself with its own rules.”
He shrugged.
“Anyway, I was bored. The test told me I was done after
twenty minutes.”
“Twenty minutes?” Quentin was torn between admiration
and envy. “Jesus Christ, it took me two hours.”
The punk shrugged again and made a face: What the hell
do you want me to say?
Among the test takers, camaraderie warred with
mistrust. Some of the kids exchanged names and home
towns and cautious observations about the test, though the
more they compared notes, the more they realized that
none of them had taken the same one. They were from all
over the country, except for two who turned out to be from
the same Inuit reservation in Saskatchewan. They went
around the room telling stories about how they’d gotten
here. No two were exactly the same, but there was always acertain family resemblance. Somebody went looking for a
lost ball in an alley, or a stray goat in a drainage ditch, or
followed an inexplicable extra cable in the high school
computer room which led to a server closet that had never
been there before. And then green grass and summer heat
and somebody to take them up to the exam room.
As soon as lunch was over teachers began poking their
heads in and calling out the names of candidates. They
went alphabetically, so it was only a couple of minutes
before a stern woman in her forties with dark shoulder-
length hair summoned Quentin Coldwater. He followed her
into a narrow wood-paneled room with tall windows that
looked out from a surprisingly great height onto the lawn
he’d crossed earlier. Chatter from the adjacent exam room
cut off abruptly when the door closed. Two chairs faced
each other across a worn, hugely thick wooden table.
Quentin felt giddy, like he was watching the whole thing
on TV. It was ridiculous. But he forced himself to pay
attention. This was a competition, and he dominated
competitions. That was what he did, and he sensed that the
stakes of this one were rising. The table was bare except
for a deck of cards and a stack of about a dozen coins.
“I understand you like magic tricks, Quentin,” the woman
said. She had a very slight accent, European but otherwise
unplaceable. Icelandic? “Why don’t you show me some?”
As a matter of fact, Quentin did like magic tricks. His
interest in magic had started three years ago, partly
inspired by his reading habits but mostly as a way of
fattening up his extracurriculars with an activity that wouldn’t
force him to actually interact with other people. Quentin had
spent hundreds of emotionally arid hours with his iPod on
palming coins and shuffling cards and producing fake
flowers from skinny plastic canes in a trance of boredom.
He watched and rewatched grainy, porn-like instructional
videotapes in which middle-aged men demonstrated close-
up magic passes in front of backdrops made of bedsheets.
Magic, Quentin discovered, wasn’t romantic at all. It wasgrim and repetitive and deceptive. And he worked his ass
off and became very good at it.
There was a store near Quentin’s house that sold magic
supplies, along with junk electronics, dusty board games,
pet rocks, and fake vomit. Ricky, the man behind the
counter, who had a beard and sideburns but no mustache,
like an Amish farmer, grudgingly agreed to give Quentin
some tips. It wasn’t long before the student surpassed the
master. At seventeen Quen tin knew the Scotch and Soda
and the tricky one-handed Charlier cut, and he could juggle
the elusive Mills Mess pattern with three balls and
sometimes, for short ecstatic flights, with four. He earned a
small dividend of popularity at school every time he
demonstrated his ability to throw, with a fierce, robotic
accuracy, an ordinary playing card sidearm so that from a
distance of ten feet it stuck edge-on in one of the flavorless
Styrofoamy apples they served in the cafeteria.
Quentin reached for the cards first. He was vain about his
shuffling, so he broke out a faro shuffle rather than the
standard riffle just in case—fat chance—the woman sitting
across from him knew the difference, and how ridiculously
hard it was to do a good faro.
He ran through his usual routine, which was already
calculated to show off as many different skills as possible:
false cuts, false shuffles, lifts, sleights, passes, forces. In
between tricks he tossed and waterfalled and avalanched
the cards from hand to hand. He had regular patter to go
with it, but it sounded clumsy and empty in this quiet, airy,
beautiful room, in front of this dignified, handsome older
woman. The words trailed off. He performed in silence.
The cards made shushing, snapping noises in the
stillness. The woman watched him steadily, obediently
choosing a card whenever he asked her to, showing no
surprise when he recovered it—against all odds!—from the
middle of a thoroughly shuffled deck, or from his shirt
pocket, or out of thin air.
He switched to the coins. They were fresh new nickels,nicely milled, good crisp edges. He had no props, no cups
or folded handkerchiefs, so he stuck to palms and passes,
flourishes and catches. The woman watched him in silence
for a minute, then reached across the table and touched his
arm.
“Do that one again,” she said.
He obediently did that one again. The trick was an old
one, the Wandering Nickel, wherein a nickel (actually three
nickels) moved mysteriously from hand to hand. He kept
showing it to the audience and then cheekily vanishing it
again; then he pretended to lose track of it entirely; then he
triumphantly produced it again, whereupon it appeared to
vanish again straight out of his open palm, in plain sight. It
was actually a fairly ordinary, if well-scripted, sequence of
steals and drops, with one particularly nervy retention-of-
vision vanish.
“Do it again.”
He did it again. She stopped him in the middle.
“This part—there is a mistake.”
“Where?” He frowned. “That’s how you do it.”
She pursed her lips and shook her head.
The woman plucked three nickels from the stack and
without an instant of hesitation, or anything in her manner
that acknowledged that she was doing something special,
performed the Wandering Nickel perfectly. Quen tin couldn’t
stop staring at her small, limber brown hands. Her
movements were smoother and more precise than any
professional’s he’d ever seen.
She stopped in the middle.
“See here, where the second coin must go from hand to
hand? You need a reverse pass, holding it like so. Here,
come around so you can see.”
He obediently trotted around to her side of the table andstood behind her, trying not to look down her blouse. Her
hands were smaller than his, but the nickel vanished
between her fingers like a bird into a thicket. She did the
move for him slowly, backward and forward, breaking it
down.
“That’s what I’m doing,” he said.
“Show me.”
Now she was openly smiling. She grasped his wrist to
stop him mid-pass.
“Now. Where is the second coin?”
He held out his hands, palm up. The coin was . . . but
there was no coin. It was gone. He turned his hands over,
waggled his fingers, looked on the table, in his lap, on the
floor. Nothing. It had disappeared. Did she nick it while he
wasn’t looking? With those fast hands and that Mona Lisa
smile, he couldn’t quite put it past her.
“It is what I thought,” she said, standing up. “Thank you,
Quentin, I will send in the next examiner.”
Quentin watched her go, still patting his pockets for the
missing coin. For the first time in his life he couldn’t tell if
he’d passed or failed.
The whole afternoon went like that: professors parading in
through one door and out the other. It was like a dream, a
long, rambling dream with no obvious meaning. There was
an old man with a shaky head who fumbled in his pants
pockets and threw a bunch of frayed, yellowed knotted
cords on the table, then stood there with a stopwatch as
Quentin untied them. A shy, pretty young woman, who
looked like she was barely older than Quentin, asked him to
draw a map of the House and the grounds based on what
he’d seen since he’d been here. A slick fellow with a huge
head and who wouldn’t or couldn’t stop talking challengedhim to a weird variant of blitz chess. After a while you
couldn’t even take it seriously—it felt like it was his credulity
that was being tested. A fat man with red hair and a self-
important air released a tiny lizard with iridescent humming-
bird wings and huge, alert eyes into the room. The man
said nothing, just folded his arms and sat on the edge of the
table, which creaked unhappily under his weight.
For lack of a better idea Quentin tried to coax the lizard
to land on his finger. It flew down and nipped a tiny chunk
out of his forearm, drawing a dot of blood, then zipped
away and buzzed against the window like a bumblebee.
The fat man silently handed Quentin a Band-Aid, collected
his lizard, and left.
Finally the door closed and didn’t open again. Quentin
took a deep breath and rolled his shoulders. Apparently the
procession had ended, though nobody bothered to say
anything to Quentin. At least he had a few minutes to
himself. By now the sun was setting. He couldn’t see it from
the exam room, but he could see a fountain, and the light
reflected in the pool of the fountain was a cool burnt orange.
A mist was rising up through the trees. The grounds were
deserted.
He rubbed his face with his hands. His head was
clearing. It occurred to him, long after it probably should
have, to wonder what the hell his parents were thinking.
Normally they were pretty indifferent to his comings and
goings, but even they had their limits. School had been out
for hours now. Maybe they thought his interview had run
long, though the chances that they even remembered
Quentin was supposed to have had an interview were pretty
small. Or if it was summer here, maybe school hadn’t even
started yet? The giddy haze he’d been lost in all afternoon
was starting to dissipate. He wondered exactly how safe he
was here. If this was a dream, he was going to have to
wake up pretty soon.
Through the closed door he distinctly heard the sound of
somebody crying: a boy, and way too old to be crying infront of other people. A teacher was speaking to him quietly
and firmly, but the boy either wouldn’t or couldn’t stop. He
ignored it, but it was a dangerous, unmanning sound, a
sound that clawed away at the outer layers of Quentin’s
hard-won teenage sangfroid. Underneath it there was
something like fear. The voices faded as the boy was led
away. Quentin heard the Dean speaking in icy, clipped
tones, trying not to sound angry.
“I’m really not sure I care one way or the other anymore.”
There was an answer, something inaudible.
“If we don’t have a Quorum we’ll simply send them all
home and skip a year.” Fogg’s genteel reserve was
decaying. “Nothing would make me happier. We can
rebuild the observatory. We can turn the school into a
nursing home for senile old professors. God knows we
have enough of those.”
Inaudible.
“There is a Twentieth, Melanie. We go through this every
year, and we will empty every high school and middle
school and juvenile detention center till we find him or her or
it. And if there isn’t I will happily resign, and it will be your
problem, and you’re welcome to it. Right now I can’t think of
anything that would make me happier.”
The door opened a crack, and for an instant a worried
face peered in at him—it was Quentin’s first examiner, the
dark-haired European lady with the clever fingers. He
opened his mouth to ask about a phone—his cell was down
to one useless flickering bar—but the door shut again. How
annoying. Was it over? Should he just leave? He made a
face to himself. He was all for adventures, God knows, but
enough was enough. This one was getting old.
The room was almost dark. He looked around for a light
switch, but there wasn’t one; in fact all the time he’d been
here he hadn’t seen a single electrical device. No phones,
no lights, no clocks. It was a long time since Quentin hadhad his sandwich and his square of dark chocolate, and he
was hungry again. He stood up and went to the window
where it was lighter.
The panes of glass were wiggly with age. Was he the last
one left? What was taking so long? The sky was a luminous
royal blue dome swarming with huge lazy whorls of stars,
van Gogh stars that would have been invisible in Brooklyn,
drowned in light pollution. He wondered how far upstate
they were, and what had happened to the note he’d been
chasing and never found. The book he’d left behind with his
backpack in the first exam room; now he wished he’d kept
it with him. He imagined his parents making dinner together
in the kitchen, something steaming on the stove, his dad
singing along to something nightmarishly unhip, two
glasses of red wine on the counter. He almost missed
them.
With no warning the door banged open and the Dean
walked in, talking over his shoulder at somebody behind
him.
“—a Candidate? Fine,” he said sarcastically. “Let’s see
a Candidate. And bring some Goddamned candles!” He
sat down at the table. His shirt was translucent with sweat. It
was not impossible that he’d had a drink between now and
the last time Quentin had seen him. “Hello, Quentin. Please
sit.”
He indicated the other chair. Quentin sat, and Fogg
rebuttoned his top button and hastily, irritably whipped a tie
out of his pocket.
The dark-haired woman followed Fogg into the room,
and after her came the old man with the knots, the fat man
with the lizard, then the rest of the dozen or so men and
women who had paraded through the room this afternoon.
They formed lines along the walls, packed themselves into
the corners, craning to look at him, whispering to one
another. The punk kid with the tattoos was there, too—he
slipped in just as the door was closing, unobserved by the“Come on, come on.” The Dean waved them into the
room. “We should really do this in the conservatory next
year. Pearl, you come around here.” This to the young blond
woman who’d made Quentin draw a map.
“Now,” he said when they were all inside. “Quentin. Sit,
please.”
Quentin was already sitting. He scooched in his chair a
little farther.
Dean Fogg took out of one pocket a fresh pack of cards,
the plastic wrap still on them, and from the other he took a
stack of nickels, maybe a dollar’s worth, which he put down
too emphatically so that they promptly slumped over. They
both reached to restack them.
“All right, let’s get to it.” Fogg clapped his hands and
rubbed them together. “Let’s see some magic!”
He sat back in his chair and folded his arms.
Hadn’t they already done this part? Quentin kept his face
studiously calm and unworried, but his mind was in free fall.
Slowly he unwrapped the stiff new cards, the plastic
crackling deafeningly in the excruciating stillness, and
watched from a mental mile away as his hands dutifully
riffled and bridged them, riffled and bridged. He searched
his brain for a trick he hadn’t already done the first time
around. Somebody coughed.
He’d barely started his routine when Fogg stopped him.
“No, no-no-no-no.” Fogg chuckled, not especially kindly.
“Not like that. I want to see some real magic .”
He knocked twice on the hard tabletop with his knuckles
and sat back again. Quentin took a deep breath and
searched Fogg’s face for the good humor he’d seen there
earlier, but Fogg just watched expectantly. His eyes were a
pale milky blue, paler than eyes usually were.
“I don’t really get what you mean,” Quentin said slowly, inthe silence, like he’d forgotten his line in the school play
and had to ask for it. “What do you mean, real magic?”
“Well, I don’t know.” Fogg shot a hilarious sideways
glance at the other teachers. “I don’t know what I mean. You
tell me what I mean.”
Quentin shuffled a couple more times, stalling. He didn’t
know what to do. He would do anything if they would just tell
him what he was supposed to do. This was it, he thought,
he was coming to the end. This is what failure feels like. He
looked around the room, but every face was either blank or
avoiding his gaze. No one was going to help him. He was
going back to Brooklyn. Maddeningly, he could feel tears
pooling in his eyes. He blinked them away. He so badly
wanted not to care, but he was falling backward, sinking
down inside himself, and there was nothing there to catch
him. This is it, he thought. This was the test he couldn’t
pass. It wasn’t really all that surprising. He just wondered
how long they were going to let it go on.
“Stop fucking with us, Quentin!” Fogg barked. He
snapped his fingers. “Come on. Wake up!”
He reached across the table and grabbed Quentin’s
hands roughly. The contact was a shock. His fingers were
strong and strangely dry and hot. He was moving Quentin’s
fingers, physically forcing them into positions they didn’t
want to be in.
“Like this,” he was saying. “Like this. Like this. ”
“Okay, stop,” Quentin said. He tried to pull away. “Stop.”
But Fogg didn’t stop. The audience shifted
uncomfortably, and somebody said something. Fogg kept
on working Quentin’s hands with both of his, kneading
them. He bent Quentin’s fingers back, stretching them apart
so that the webs between his fingers burned. Light seemed
to flash between their hands.
“I said, stop it!” Quentin jerked his hands away.It was surprising how good the anger felt. It was
something to grab on to. In the shocked silence that
followed he took a deep breath and forced it out through his
nose. When it was out he felt like he’d expelled some of his
despair with it. He’d had enough of being judged. He’d
been sucking it up his whole life, but even he had his limit.
Fogg was talking again, but now Quentin wasn’t even
listening. He had begun to recite something under his
breath, something familiar. It took him a second to realize
that the words he was mouthing weren’t English; they were
from the foreign language he had invented earlier that
afternoon. It was an obscure language—he’d decided—
indigenous to a single tropical archipelago, a languorous
hot-weather paradise, a Gauguin painting, blessed with
black sand beaches and breadfruit trees and freshwater
springs and endowed with an angry, glowing red volcano
god and an oral culture rich in obscene expletives. He
spoke this language fluently, with no accent, like a native.
The words he spoke were not a prayer, exactly. More of an
incantation.
Quentin stopped shuffling the cards. There was no going
back. Everything snapped into very slow, slow motion, as if
the room had filled up with a viscous but perfectly clear
liquid in which everyone and everything floated easily and
calmly. Everyone and everything except for Quen tin, who
moved quickly. With two hands together, as if he were
releasing a dove, he tossed the deck of cards lightly up to
the ceiling. The deck broke apart and scattered in flight,
like a meteorite losing cohesion in the atmosphere, and as
the cards fluttered back down to earth they stacked
themselves on the tabletop. They formed a house of cards.
It was a recognizable, if impressionistic, model of the
building they were sitting in. The cards fell as if by chance,
but each one perfectly, snapping into place magnetically,
edge to edge, one after other. The last two, the aces of
spades and hearts, leaned up against each other to make
the roof over the clock tower.
Now the room was absolutely still. Dean Fogg sat as ifhe were frozen in place. All the hairs were standing up on
Quentin’s arms, but he knew what he was doing. His fingers
left almost imperceptible phosphorescent trails behind
them in the air. He definitely felt high. He leaned forward
and blew lightly on the card house, and it collapsed back
down into a neatly stacked deck. He turned the deck over
and fanned it out on the table like a blackjack dealer. Every
card was a Queen—all the standard suits, plus other suits
that didn’t exist, in different colors, green and yellow and
blue. The Queen of Horns, the Queen of Clocks, the Queen
of Bees, the Queen of Books. Some were clothed, some
were shamelessly naked. Some of them had Julia’s face.
Some of them had the lovely paramedic’s.
Dean Fogg watched Quentin intently. Everybody watched
him. Watch this: Quentin squared the deck again and with
no particular effort ripped it in half and then ripped the
halves in half and tossed the resulting confetti at the
assembled company, who all flinched except for Fogg.
He stood up. His chair fell over backward.
“Tell me where I am,” Quentin said softly. “Tell me what
I’m doing here.”
He picked up the stack of nickels in his fist, only it was no
longer a stack of coins, it was the hilt of a bright, burning
sword that he drew easily out of the tabletop, as if it had
been left there buried up to the hilt.
“Tell me what’s going on here,” Quentin said, louder, to
the room. “And if this place isn’t Fillory, then for fuck’s sake
will somebody please tell me where the hell I am?”
Quentin let the tip of the sword hover under Fogg’s nose
for a slow ten-count, then he reversed his grip and stabbed
it down into the wood of the table. The point bit deep into
the buttery wood and stuck there.
Fogg didn’t move. The sword waggled in place. Quentin
sniffed involuntarily. The last of the light from the window
died. It was night.“Well now,” the Dean said finally. He removed a neatly
folded handkerchief from his pocket and patted his
forehead. “I think we can all agree that that was a Pass.”
Somebody—it was the old guy with the knots—put a
reassuring hand on Quentin’s back and gently, with
surprising strength, drew the sword out of the table and laid
it safely on its side. A slow patter of applause arose from
the assembled examiners. It quickly turned into an ovation.ELIOT
Afterward Quentin couldn’t remember much of the rest of
that night, except that he spent it there at the school. He
was exhausted, and weak, like he’d been drugged. His
chest felt hollowed out and empty. He wasn’t even hungry
anymore, just desperate to sleep. It was embarrassing, but
nobody seemed to mind. Professor Van der Weghe—it
turned out that was the dark-haired woman’s name—told
him it was perfectly natural to be tired because he had just
cast his first Minor Incantation, whatever that was, and that
would wear anybody out. She further promised him that
matters had been squared with his parents. They wouldn’t
be worried. By that point Quentin barely cared, he just
wanted to pass out.
He let her half lead, half carry him up approximately ten
thousand flights of stairs to a small, neat room containing a
very, very soft featherbed with cool white sheets. He lay
down on it with his shoes still on. Ms. Van der Weghe took
them off for him—it made him feel like a little kid to have
somebody untie his shoes for him. She covered him up,
and he was asleep before she closed the door.
The next morning it took him a long, confused minute to
figure out where he was. He lay in bed, slowly piecing
together his memories of the day before. It was a Friday,
and by rights he should be in school now. Instead he was
waking up in an unfamiliar bedroom wearing yesterday’s
clothes. He felt vaguely confused and regretful, like he’d
drunk too much at a party with people he didn’t know very
well and fallen asleep in the host’s spare bedroom. He
even had a trace of what felt like a hangover.
What exactly had happened last night? What had he
done? His memories were all wrong. The events were like
a dream—they had to be—but they didn’t feel like a dream.
And this room wasn’t a dream. A crow cawed loudly
outside and immediately stopped, as if it wereembarrassed. There was no other sound.
From where he lay he took stock of the room he was in.
The walls were curved—the room was in the shape of a
section of a circle. The outer wall was stone; the inner was
taken up with dark wooden cabinets and cubbies. There
was a Victorian-looking writing desk and a dresser and a
mirror. His bed was tucked into a wooden alcove. There
were small vertical windows all along the outer wall. He had
to admit it was a highly satisfactory room. No danger signs
yet. Maybe this wasn’t a complete disaster. At any rate it
was time to get up. Time to get it over with and find out
what was going on.
He got up and padded over to a window. The stone floor
was cool on his bare feet. It was early, a misty dawn, and
he was very high up, higher than the tops of the highest
trees. He had slept for ten hours. He looked down on the
green lawn. It was silent and empty. He saw the crow: it
drifted by below him on glossy blue-black wings.
A note on the desk informed him that he would be having
breakfast with Dean Fogg at his earliest convenience.
Quentin discovered a dormitory-style bathroom on the floor
below, with shower stalls and rows of capacious white
porcelain sinks and stacks of neatly folded scratchy white
institutional towels. He washed up—the water was hot and
strong, and he let it blast him till he felt clean and calm. He
took a long pent-up acid-yellow piss in the shower and
watched it spiral down the drain. It felt deeply weird not to
be in school, to be on an adventure somewhere new,
however dubious. It felt good. A mental meter in his brain
was totting up the damage that his absence would be
wreaking at home in Brooklyn; so far it was still within
acceptable limits. He made himself as presentable as
possible in his day-old, slept-in interview suit and walked
downstairs.The place was completely deserted. He hadn’t expected
a formal reception, exactly, but he had to wander around for
twenty minutes, through empty hallways and drawing rooms
and classrooms and out onto terraces, before the white-
gloved butler who’d served him his sandwich yesterday
finally found him and deposited him in the Dean’s office,
which was surprisingly small and mostly taken up by a
presidential desk the size of a panzer tank. The walls were
lined with an assortment of books and old-looking brass
instruments.
The Dean arrived a minute later wearing a light green
linen suit and a yellow tie. He was brusque and peppy and
showed no sign of embarrassment, or any other emotion,
relating to the scene the night before. He had already had
breakfast, Fogg explained, but Quentin would eat while they
talked.
“Now.” He clapped his hands on his knees and quirked
his eyebrows. “First things first: magic is real. But you’ve
probably already gotten that far.”
Quentin said nothing. He kept his face, his whole body,
carefully still in his chair. He looked at a spot over Fogg’s
shoulder. He was giving nothing away. Certainly it was the
simplest possible explanation for what had happened last
night. Part of him, the part he trusted least, wanted to leap
on this idea like a puppy on a ball. But in light of everything
else that had ever happened to him, in his entire life, he
checked himself. He’d spent too long being disappointed
by the world—he’d spent so many years pining for
something like this, some proof that the real world wasn’t
the only world, and coping with the overwhelming evidence
that it in fact was. He wasn’t going to be suckered in just
like that. It was like finding a clue that somebody you’d
buried and mourned wasn’t really dead after all.
He let Fogg talk.
“To answer your questions of last night, you are at the
Brakebills College for Magical Pedagogy.” The butler
arrived with a tray crowded with covered dishes, which hebusily uncovered, like a room-service waiter. “Based on
your performance in the Examination yesterday, we’ve
decided to offer you a place here. Try the bacon, it’s very
good. Local farm, they raise the pigs on cream and
walnuts.”
“You want me to go to school here. College.”
“Yes. You’d come here instead of matriculating at a
conventional university. If you like it, you can even keep the
room you stayed in last night.”
“But I can’t just—” Quentin didn’t know exactly how to put
everything that was ridiculous about that idea in a single
sentence. “I’m sorry, this is a little confusing. So I would put
off college?”
“No, Quentin. You wouldn’t put off college. You would
abandon college. Brakebills would be your college.” The
Dean had obviously had a lot of practice at this. “There
would be no Ivy League for you. You wouldn’t go off to
school with the rest of your class. You would never make
Phi Beta Kappa or be recruited by a hedge fund or a
management consultancy. This isn’t summer school,
Quentin. This is”—he pronounced the phrase precisely,
eyes wide—“ ‘the whole shebang.’ ”
“So it’s four years—”
“Five, actually.”
“—at the end of which I get what? A bachelor’s of
magic?” It was actually funny. “I can’t believe I’m having this
conversation,” he said to nobody.
“At the end of which you will be a magician, Quentin. It is
not the obvious career path, I know. Your guidance
counselor would not approve. No one will know what you’re
doing here. You would be leaving all that behind. Your
friends, whatever career plans you had, everything. You
would be losing one world but gaining another. Brakebills
would become your world. It’s not a decision to be taken
lightly.”Well, no, it wasn’t. Quentin pushed his plate away and
crossed his arms. He stalled.
“So, how did you find me?”
“Oh, we have a device for that, a globe.” Fogg indicated
a shelf holding a whole menagerie of them: modern globes;
blackwater globes; pale lunar globes; glittering midnight-
blue celestial globes; dark, smoky, unreadable globes
awash with ludicrously inaccurate continents. “It finds young
people like yourself who have an aptitude for magic—
essentially it senses magic being performed, often
inadvertently, by unregistered sorcerers, of which you are
one. I suppose it must have picked up that Wandering
Nickel trick of yours.
“We have scouts, too,” he added. “Your odd friend Ricky
with the whiskers is one.” He touched his jawline where
Ricky’s Amish beard was.
“What about that woman I met, with the braids. The
paramedic. Was she a scout, too?”
Fogg frowned. “With braids? You saw her?”
“Well, yes. Right before I came here. Didn’t you send
her?”
Fogg’s face became studiously empty.
“In a manner of speaking. She’s a special case. Works
on an independent basis. Freelance, you might say.”
Quentin’s mind spun. Maybe he should ask to see a
brochure. And no one had said anything about tuition yet.
And gift horses and all that notwithstanding, how much did
he know about this place? Suppose it really was a school
for magic. Was it any good? What if he’d stumbled into
some third-tier magic college by accident? He had to think
practically. He didn’t want to be committing himself to some
community college of sorcery when he could have Magic
Harvard or whatever.
“Don’t you want to see my SATs?”“I have,” Fogg said patiently. “And a lot more than that.
But yesterday’s Exam was all we really needed. It’s very
comprehensive. Admission here is quite competitive, you
know. I doubt there’s a more exclusive school of any kind
on the continent. We held six Exams this summer, for
twenty places. Only two Passed yesterday, you and another
boy, the boy with the tattoos and the hair. Penny, he says
his name is. Can’t be his real name.
“This is the only magical school in North America,” Fogg
went on, leaning back behind his desk. He almost seemed
to be enjoying Quentin’s discomfort. “There’s one in the UK,
two on the Continent, four in Asia, and so on. One in New
Zealand for some reason. People talk a lot of guff about
American magic, but I assure you we are quite up to the
international standard. In Zurich they still teach phrenology,
if you can believe that.”
Something small but heavy fell off Fogg’s desk with a
clunk. He bent to retrieve it: a silver statue of a bird that
seemed to be twitching.
“Poor little thing,” he said, petting it with his large hands.
“Someone tried to change it into a real bird, but it got stuck
in between. It thinks it’s alive, but it’s much too heavy to fly.”
The metal bird cheeped feebly, a dry clicking noise like an
empty pistol. Fogg sighed and put it away in a drawer. “It’s
always launching itself out of windows and landing in the
hedges.
“Now.” The Dean leaned forward and steepled his
fingers. “Should you choose to matriculate here, we’ll do
some minor illusion work with your parents. They can’t know
about Brakebills, of course, but they’ll think you’ve been
accepted to a very prestigious private institute—which isn’t
at all far from the truth—and they’ll be very proud. It’s
painless and quite effective, as long as you don’t say
anything too obvious.
“Oh, and you’ll start right away. The semester begins in
two weeks, so you’ll have to skip the rest of your senioryear. But I really shouldn’t be telling you all this before we’ve
done your paperwork.”
Fogg took out a pen and a fat sheaf of closely
handwritten paper that looked like a treaty between two
eighteenth-century nation-states.
“Penny signed yesterday,” he said. “Very quick
Examination, that boy. What do you say?”
So that was it, that was the sales pitch. Fogg put the
papers in front of him and held out the pen. Quentin took it,
a fancy-looking metal fountain pen as thick as a cigar. His
hand hovered over the page. This was ridiculous. Was he
really going to throw everything away? Everything:
everybody he knew, James and Julia, whatever college he
would have gone to, whatever career he would have had,
everything he thought he’d been getting ready for. For this?
This bizarre charade, this fever dream, this fancy-dress
role-playing game?
He stared out the window. Fogg watched him
impassively, just waiting for him to fall for it. If he cared one
way or the other, he wasn’t letting on. The little floundering
metal bird, having escaped its drawer, butted its head
industriously against the wainscoting.
And then a vast stony weight suddenly lifted off Quentin’s
chest. It felt like it had been there his entire life, an invisible
albatross, a granite millstone holding him down, and all at
once it just dropped away and disappeared without a
splash. His chest expanded. He was going to bob up to the
ceiling like a balloon. They were going to make him a
magician, and all he had to do was sign. Jesus, what the
hell was he thinking? Of course he was going to sign. This
was everything he’d always wanted, the break he’d given
up on years ago. It was right in front of him. He was finally
on the other side, down the rabbit hole, through the looking
glass. He was going to sign the papers and he was going
to be a motherfucking magician. Or what the hell else was
he going to do with his life?“Okay,” Quentin said evenly. “All right. On one condition: I
want to start now. I want to stay in that room. I don’t want to
go home.”
They didn’t make him go home. Instead, his things arrived
from home in a collection of duffel bags and rolly suitcases,
packed by his parents, who had, as Fogg promised,
somehow been squared with the idea that their only child
was suddenly matriculating in the middle of the semester at
a mysterious educational institution they had never visited
or even heard of. Quentin slowly unpacked his clothes and
his books and put them away in the cabinets and cubbies
in the little curved tower room. He didn’t even want to touch
them now. They were part of his old self, his old life, the one
he was molting away. The only thing missing was the book,
the notebook the paramedic gave him. That was nowhere
to be found. He’d left it in the exam room on the assumption
that he’d be going back there, but when he finally did it was
gone. Dean Fogg and the butler pled ignorance.
Sitting there alone in his room, his folded clothes around
him on the bed, he thought about James and Julia. God
only knew what they were thinking. Did she miss him? Now
that he was gone, would she realize she’d had the wrong
man all along? He should probably get in touch with them
somehow. Though really, what the hell could he say? He
wondered what would have happened if James had taken
the envelope from the paramedic too. Maybe he would
have gotten to take the exam, too. Maybe that was part of
the test.
He let himself unclench a little. Just slightly, he stopped
bracing for the blow from above, and for the first time he
seriously considered the idea that it might not come at all.
With nothing else to do Quentin roamed through the huge
house, unsupervised and rudderless. The Dean and the
teachers were nice enough when he ran into them, but theyhad their own work to do and their own problems to deal
with. It was like being at a fancy beach resort during the off-
season, rattling around in a grand hotel with no guests, just
empty rooms and empty gardens and empty, echoing
hallways. He ate his meals alone in his room and loitered in
the library—naturally they had the complete works of
Christopher Plover—and luxuriously contemplated, one by
one, in order, each of the problem sets and projects and
papers he would never have to finish. Once he found his
way up to the clock tower and spent an afternoon watching
the huge rusty iron pendulum sway back and forth, following
the massive gears and levers and catchments as they
turned and meshed, carrying out their mechanical
syllogism, until the glow of the setting sun shone through the
tremendous backward clock face.
Sometimes he burst out laughing out of nowhere, for no
reason. He was experimenting cautiously with the idea of
being happy, dipping an uncertain toe into those
intoxicatingly carbonated waters. It wasn’t something he’d
had much practice at. It was just too fucking funny. He was
going to learn magic! He was either the greatest genius of
all time or the biggest idiot. But at least he was actually
curious about what was going to happen to him next. For
the first time in he didn’t know how long he was actually
following the action with interest. In Brooklyn reality had
been empty and meaningless—whatever inferior stuff it
was made of, meaning had refused to adhere to it.
Brakebills was different. It mattered. Meaning—is that what
magic was?—was everywhere here. The place was
crawling with it. Out there he had been on the edge of
serious depression, and worse, he had been in danger of
learning to really dislike himself. He was on the verge of
incurring the kind of inward damage you didn’t heal from,
ever. But now he felt like Pinocchio, a wooden boy who was
made real. Or maybe it was the other way around, he’d
been turned from a real boy into something else? Either
way the change was for the better. It wasn’t Fillory, but it
would do.He didn’t spend all his time alone. Once in a while he
spotted Eliot from a distance, loping across the empty
green or lolling with his long legs folded up in a window
seat, staring out the window or leafing distractedly through
a book. He had an air of magnificent melancholy
sophistication, as if his proper place were elsewhere,
somewhere infinitely more compelling even than Brakebills,
and he’d been confined to his present setting by a
grotesque divine oversight, which he tolerated with as much
good humor as could be expected.
One day Quentin was walking the edge of the great lawn
when he came across Eliot leaning against an oak tree,
smoking a cigarette and reading a paperback book. It was
more or less the same spot where they first met. Because
of the odd way Eliot’s jaw was built, the cigarette stuck out
at an angle.
“Want one?” Eliot asked politely. He stopped reading
and held out a blue-and-white pack of Merit Ultra Lights.
They hadn’t spoken since Quentin’s first day at Brakebills.
“They’re contraband,” he went on, not visibly
disappointed that Quen tin didn’t take one. “Chambers
buys them for me. I once caught him in the wine cellar
drinking a very good petite syrah from the Dean’s private
collection. Stags’ Leap, the ninety-six. We came to an
understanding. He’s really a nice fellow, I shouldn’t hold it
over his head. Quite a good amateur painter, albeit in a
sadly outdated realist mode. I let him paint me once—
draped, thank you very much. I was holding a Frisbee. I
think I was supposed to be Hyacinthus. Chambers is a
pompiste at heart. Deep down I don’t think he believes
Impressionism ever happened.”
Quentin had never met anybody so staggeringly and
unapologetically affected. It was hard to know how to
respond. He summoned up all the wisdom he’d
accumulated during his entire life in Brooklyn.
“Merits are for pussies,” he said.Eliot looked at him appraisingly.
“Very true. But they’re the only cigarette I can stand.
Disgusting habit. Come on, smoke one with me.”
Quentin accepted the cigarette. He was in unfamiliar
territory here. He’d handled cigarettes before—they were
common props in close-up magic—but he’d never actually
put one in his mouth. He made the cigarette vanish—a
basic thumb palm—then snapped his fingers to bring it
back.
“I said smoke it, not fondle it,” Eliot said curtly.
He muttered something under his breath, then snapped
his own fingers. A lighter-size flame sprang into being over
the tip of his index finger. Quentin leaned in and inhaled.
It felt like his lungs had been crumpled up and then
incinerated. He coughed for five solid minutes without
stopping. Eliot laughed so hard he had to sit down.
Quentin’s face was slick with tears. He forced himself to
take another drag and threw up into a hedge.
They spent the rest of that afternoon together. Maybe he felt
guilty for giving Quentin the cigarette, or maybe Eliot had
decided that the tedium of solitude was ever so slightly
greater than the tedium of Quentin’s company. Maybe he
just needed a straight man. He led Quentin around the
campus and lectured him on the underground lore of life at
Brakebills.
“The keen-eyed incoming freshman will have noticed the
weather, which is uncommonly clement for November.
That’s because it’s still summer here. There are some very
old spells on the Brakebills grounds to keep people from
spotting it from the river or walking in by accident, that kind
of thing. Fine old enchantments. Classic work of their kind.
But they’re getting eccentric in their old age, andsomewhere in the 1950s time started spinning off its axis
here. Gets worse every year. Nothing to worry about, in the
larger picture, but we’re a little behind the mainstream. Two
months twenty-eight days, give or take a few hours.”
Quentin didn’t know whether to act as awestruck as he
felt or try to produce an imitation of cool worldly ennui. He
changed the subject and asked about the curriculum.
“You won’t have any choice about your schedule your first
year. Henry”—Eliot only ever referred to Dean Fogg by his
first name—“makes everybody do the same thing. Are you
smart?”
There was no non-embarrassing answer to this.
“I guess.”
“Don’t worry about it, everybody here is. If they even
brought you in for the Exam you were the smartest person
in your school, teachers included. Everyone here was the
cleverest little monkey in his or her particular tree. Except
now we’re all in one tree together. It can be a shock. Not
enough coconuts to go round. You’ll be dealing with your
equals for the first time in your life, and your betters. You
won’t like it.
“The work is different, too. It’s not what you think. You
don’t just wave a wand and yell some made-up Latin.
There’s reasons why most people can’t do it.”
“Which are what?” Quentin asked.
“The reasons why most people can’t do magic? Well.”
Eliot held up a long, thin finger. “One, it’s very hard, and
they’re not smart enough. Two, it’s very hard, and they’re
not obsessive and miserable enough to do all the work you
have to do to do it right. Three, they lack the guidance and
mentorship provided by the dedicated and startlingly
charismatic faculty of the Brakebills College for Magical
Pedagogy. And four, they lack the tough, starchy moral fiber
necessary to wield awesome magical energies calmly and
responsibly.“And five”—he stuck up his thumb—“some people have
all that stuff and they still can’t do it. Nobody knows why.
They say the words, wave their arms, and nothing happens.
Poor bastards. But that’s not us. We’re the lucky ones. We
have it, whatever it is.”
“I don’t know if I have the moral fiber one.”
“I don’t either. I think that one’s optional, actually.”
Silent for a while, they walked along a lush, ruler-straight
allée of fence trees leading back toward the lawn. Eliot lit
another cigarette.
“Listen, I don’t want to pry,” Quentin said, “but I’m
assuming you have some secret magical way of dealing
with the negative health effects of all those cigarettes.”
“It’s kind of you to ask. I sacrifice a virgin schoolgirl every
other fortnight by the light of a gibbous moon, using a silver
scalpel forged by Swiss albinos. Who are also virgins.
Clears my little lungs right up.”
After that Quentin saw Eliot most days. Eliot spent one
entire afternoon teaching him how to navigate the hedge
maze that separated the House—“as everybody calls it”—
from the great lawn, which was officially named Seagrave’s
Lawn after the eighteenth-century Dean who cleared and
leveled it, and which “everybody” referred to as the Sea, or
sometimes the Grave. There were six fountains scattered
throughout the maze (the Maze), and each one had an
official name, usually that of a deceased Dean, as well as a
nickname generated by the collective unconsciousness of
generations of Brakebillian undergraduates. The hedges
that made up the Maze were cut in the shape of heavy,
slow-thighed beasts—bears and elephants and other less-
easily-identifiable creatures. Unlike ordinary topiary they
moved: they lumbered along very slowly, almost
imperceptibly, wading half submerged in the dark foliage
like hippopotami wallowing in an equatorial African river.
On the last day before classes began, Eliot led himaround to the front of the House, which looked out on the
Hudson. There was a scrim of plane trees between the front
terrace and the river and a flight of wide stone steps that
led down to a handsome Victorian boathouse. They
decided on the spot that they absolutely had to go out on
the water, even though neither of them had any practical
ideas about how to do it. As Eliot pointed out, they were
both certified sorcerer-geniuses, and how hard could it be
to row a damn boat?
With a lot of grunting and yelling at each other, they
wrestled a long wooden double scull down from the rafters.
It was a fabulous object, strangely light, like the husk of a
colossal stick insect, wreathed in cobwebs and redolent
with the heady smell of wood varnish. Mostly by luck they
managed to turn it over and splash it down into the water
without injuring it or themselves or getting so pissed off at
each other that they had to abandon the whole project. After
some early close calls they got it pointed in a plausible
direction and settled into a slow, halting rhythm with it,
hindered but not daunted by their incompetence and by the
fact that Quentin was hopelessly out of shape and Eliot was
both out of shape and a heavy smoker.
They got about half a mile upstream before the summer
day abruptly vanished around them and became chilly and
gray. Quentin thought it was a summer squall until Eliot
explained that they’d reached the outer limits of whatever
concealment spells had been applied to the Brakebills
grounds, and it was November again. They wasted twenty
minutes rowing up past the change and then drifting back
down again, up and back, watching the sky change color,
feeling the temperature drop and then soar and then drop
again.
They were too tired to row on the way back, so they
drifted with the current. Eliot lay back in the scull and
smoked and talked. Because of his air of infallible
entitlement Quentin assumed he’d been raised among the
wealthy mandarins of Manhattan, but it turned out he’d“My parents are paid not to grow soybeans,” he said. “I
have three older brothers. Magnificent physical specimens
—kind-hearted, thick-necked, three-sport athletes who
drink Schlitz and feel sorry for me. My dad doesn’t know
what happened. He thinks he chewed too much dip before I
was conceived, and that’s why I ‘di’n’t come out reg’lar.’ ”
Eliot stubbed out his Merit in a glass ashtray balanced
precariously on the glossy wooden hull and lit another one.
“They think I’m at a special school for computer geeks and
homosexuals.
“That’s why I don’t go home in the summertime. Henry
doesn’t care. I haven’t been home since I started here.
“You probably feel sorry for me,” he went on airily. He
wore a dressing gown over his regular clothes, which gave
him a shabby princely look. “You shouldn’t, you know. I’m
very happy here. Some people need their families to
become who they’re supposed to be. And there’s nothing
wrong with that. But there are other ways to do it.”
Quentin hadn’t realized how hard-won Eliot’s air of
ludicrously exaggerated insouciance must be. That facade
of lofty indifference must be there to hide real problems.
Quentin liked to think of himself as a sort of regional
champion of unhappiness, but he wondered if Eliot had him
outclassed on that score, too.
As they drifted home they were passed by a few other
boats, sailboats and cabin cruisers and a hard-charging
eight-woman scull out of West Point, which was a few miles
upriver. The occupants looked grim and bundled-up against
the cold, in gray sweatshirts and sweatpants. They couldn’t
perceive, or somehow weren’t part of, the August heat that
Quentin and Eliot were enjoying. They were warm and dry
and didn’t even know it. The terms of the enchantment
locked them out.MAGIC
“ The study of magic is not a science, it is not an art, and it
is not a religion. Magic is a craft. When we do magic, we
do not wish and we do not pray. We rely upon our will and
our knowledge and our skill to make a specific change to
the world.
“This is not to say that we understand magic, in the sense
that physicists understand why subatomic particles do
whatever it is that they do. Or perhaps they don’t
understand that yet, I can never remember. In any case, we
do not and cannot understand what magic is, or where it
comes from, any more than a carpenter understands why a
tree grows. He doesn’t have to. He works with what he has.
“With the caveat that it is much more difficult and much
more dangerous and much more interesting to be a
magician than it is to be a carpenter.”
Delivering this edifying lecture was Professor March,
whom Quentin had last seen during his Examination—he
was the round, red-haired man with the hungry lizard.
Because he was plump and red-faced he looked like he
should be jolly and easygoing, but in actuality he was
turning out to be kind of a hard-ass.
When Quentin woke up that morning the huge empty
House was full of people—yelling, running, noisy people
who dragged trunks thunder ously up stairs and
occasionally banged open his door, looked him over, and
then slammed it shut again. It was a rude awakening; he’d
gotten used to wandering around the House by himself as
its undisputed lord and master, or at least, after Eliot, its
senior undersecretary. But as it turned out there were
ninety-nine other students enrolled at Brakebills, divided
into five classes that corresponded roughly to freshman
through first-year graduate student. They had arrived this
morning en masse for the first day of the semester, andthey were asserting their rights.
They came in clumps, materializing ten at a time on the
back terrace, each group with a hillock of trunks and duffle
bags and suitcases beside it. Everybody except Quentin
was in uniform: striped blazers and ties for the guys, white
blouses and dark tartan skirts for the girls. For a college, it
all looked a whole lot like a prep school.
“It’s jacket and tie at all times except in your room,” Fogg
explained. “There are more rules; you’ll pick them up from
the others. Most boys like to choose their own ties. I am
inclined to be lenient on that score, but don’t test me.
Anything too exciting will be confiscated, and you’ll be
forced to wear the school tie, which I know very little about
these things, but I am told is cruelly unfashionable.”
When Quentin got back to his room he found a closetful
of identical jackets hanging there, dark blue and chocolate
brown in inch-wide stripes, paired with white dress shirts.
Most of them looked brand new; a few showed signs of
incipient sheen at the elbows or fraying around the cuffs
and smelled faintly but not unpleasantly of mothballs and
tobacco and former occupants. He changed gingerly and
looked at himself in the mirror. He knew that he was
probably supposed to resent the uniform, but he relished it.
If he didn’t feel like a magician yet, at least he could look
like one.
Each jacket had an embroidered coat of arms on it, a
golden bee and a golden key on a black background
dotted with tiny silver stars. He would later hear other
students call this device the key-and-bee, and once he
started looking for it he saw it everywhere, worked into
carpets and curtains, carved into stone lintels, pieced into
the corners of parquet floors.
Now Quentin sat in a large square lecture hall, a corner
room with high, lofty windows on two sides. It contained fourrows of elegant wooden desks set on raked steps like an
amphitheater, looking down on a large blackboard and a
massive stone demonstration table that had been
scorched, scratched, scarred, and scathed within an inch of
its life. Particles of chalk dust hung in the air. The class had
twenty students, all in uniform, all looking like very ordinary
teenagers trying very hard to look cooler and smarter than
each other. Quentin knew that probably half the Intel
Science Talent Search winners and Scripps Spelling Bee
champions in the country were in this room. Based on what
he had overheard, one of his classmates had placed
second in the Putnam Competition, as a high school junior.
He knew for a fact that one of the girls had managed to
take over the plenary session of the national model UN and
push through a motion sanctioning the use of nuclear
weapons to protect a critically endangered species of sea
turtle. This while representing Lesotho.
Not that any of that stuff mattered anymore, but the air
was still thick with nerves. Sitting there in his new-smelling
shirt and jacket, Quentin already wished he were back on
the river with Eliot.
Professor March paused, refocusing.
“Quentin Coldwater, would you please come up to the
front of the class? Why don’t you do some of your magic for
us?”
March was looking straight at him.
“That’s right.” His manner was warm and cheery, like he
was giving Quentin a prize. “Right here.” He indicated a
spot next to him. “Here. I’ll give you a prop.”
Professor March rummaged in his pockets and took out
a clear glass marble, somewhat linty, and put it on the table,
where it rolled a few inches before it found a hollow to settle
in.
The classroom was absolutely still. Quentin knew this
wasn’t a real test. It was some kind of object-lesson-slash-hazing ritual. An annual thing, probably nothing to worry
about, just one more wonderful old Brakebills tradition. But
his legs felt like wooden stilts as he made his way down the
broad steps to the front of the class. The other students
stared at him with the cold indifference of the gratefully
spared.
He took his place next to March. The marble looked
ordinary, just glass with a few air bubbles in it. About the
same circumference as a nickel. Probably about as easy to
palm, too, Quentin supposed. With his brand-new school
jacket on he could cuff and sleeve it without too much
trouble. All right, he thought, if it’s magic they want, magic
they shall get. Blood thundering in his ears, he produced it
from either hand, from his mouth, from his nose. He was
rewarded with scattered giggles from the audience.
The tension broke. He hammed it up. He tossed the
marble up in the air, letting it almost brush the high
cathedral ceiling, then leaned forward and caught it neatly
balanced in the hollow of the back of his neck. Somebody
did a rim shot on his desk. The room broke up.
For his grand finale Quentin pretended to crush the
marble with a heavy iron paperweight, at the last second
substituting a mint Lifesaver he happened to have in his
pocket, which made a nice solid crunch and left behind a
forensically convincing spray of white powder. He
apologized profusely to Professor March, winking broadly
at the audience, then asked him if he could borrow his
handkerchief. When he reached for the handkerchief,
Professor March discovered the marble in his own jacket
pocket.
Quentin executed a Johnny Carson golf swing. The First
Years applauded wildly. He bowed. Not bad, he thought.
Half an hour into his first semester and he was already a
folk hero.
“Thank you, Quentin,” Professor March said unctuously,
clapping with the tips of his fingers. “Thank you, that was
very enlightening. You may return to your seat. Alice, whatabout you? Why don’t you show us some magic.”
This remark was addressed to a small, sullen girl with
straight blonde hair who’d been huddling in the back row.
She showed no surprise at being picked; she looked like
the kind of person who expected the worst at all times, and
why should today be any different? She walked down the
wide steps of the lecture hall to the front of the room—eyes
straight ahead, cold bloodedly ascending the gallows,
looking hideously uncomfortable in her freshly creased
uniform—and mutely accepted her marble from Professor
March. Taking her place behind the demonstration table,
which came up to her chest, she steadied it on the stone
tabletop.
Immediately she made a series of rapid, businesslike
gestures over the marble. It looked like she was doing sign
language, or assembling a cat’s cradle with invisible string.
Her unfussy manner was the opposite of Quen tin’s slick,
show-offy style. Alice stared at the marble intently,
expectantly. Her eyes went a little crossed. Her lips moved,
though from where he was sitting Quentin couldn’t hear
what she was saying.
The marble began to glow red, then white, becoming
opaque, an eye clouding over with a milky cataract. A
slender undulating curl of gray smoke rose up from the
point where it touched the table. Quentin’s smug,
triumphant feeling went cold and congealed. She already
knew real magic, he thought. My God, I am so far behind.
Alice rubbed her hands together.
“It takes a minute for my fingers to become impervious.”
Cautiously, as if she were retrieving a hot dish from an
oven, Alice plucked at the glass marble with her fingertips.
It was now molten from the heat, and it pulled like taffy. In
four quick, sure motions she gave the marble four legs, then
added a head. When she took her hands away and blew on
it the marble rolled over, shook itself once, and stood up. It
had become a tiny, plump glass animal. It began to walkacross the table.
This time no one applauded. The chill in the room was
palpable. The hair stood up on Quentin’s arms. The only
sound was the soft tik-tik-katikkatik of its pointy glass feet
on the stone tabletop.
“Thank you, Alice!” Professor March said, regaining the
stage. “For those of you who are wondering, Alice just
performed three basic spells.” He held up a finger for each
one. “Dempsey’s Silent Thermogenesis; a lesser Cavalieri
animation; and some kind of ward-and-shield that appears
to be home-brewed, so maybe we should name it after you,
Alice.”
Alice looked back at March impassively, waiting for a
cue that she could go back to her seat. She wasn’t even
smug, just impatient to be released. Forgotten, the little
glass creature reached the end of the table. Alice made a
grab for it, but it fell and smashed on the hard stone floor.
She crouched down over it, stricken, but Professor March
was already moving on, wrapping up his lecture.
Quentin watched the little drama with a mixture of
compassion and rivalrous envy. Such a tender soul, he
thought. But she’s the one I’ll have to beat.
“Tonight please read the first chapter of Le Goff ’s
Magickal Historie, in the Lloyd translation,” March said,
“and the first two chapters of Amelia Popper’s Practical
Exercises for Young Magicians, a book that you will soon
come to despise with every fiber of your innocent young
beings. I invite you to attempt the first four exercises. Each
of you will be performing one of them for the class
tomorrow.
“And if you find Lady Popper’s rather quaint eighteenth-
century English difficult, keep in mind that next month we
will be starting Middle English, Latin, and Old High Dutch,
at which time you will look back on Lady Popper’s
eighteenth-century English with fond nostalgia.”Students began stirring and gathering up their books.
Quentin looked down at the notebook in front of him, which
was empty except for one anxious zigzaggy line.
“Final thought before you go.” March raised his voice
over the shuffling clatter. “I urge you again to think of this as
a purely practical course, with a minimum of theory. If you
find yourself becoming curious about the nature and origins
of the magical powers you are slowly and very, very
painfully cultivating, remember this famous anecdote about
the English philosopher Bertrand Russell.
“Russell once gave a public lecture on the structure of the
universe. Afterward he was approached by a woman who
told him that he was a very clever young man but much
mistaken in his thinking, because everyone knew that the
world was flat and sat on the back of a turtle.
“When Russell asked her what the turtle was standing on,
she replied, ‘You’re very clever, young man, very clever. But
it’s turtles all the way down!’
“The woman was wrong about the world, of course, but
she would have been quite right if she’d been talking about
magic. Great mages have wasted their lives trying to get at
the root of magic. It is a futile pursuit, not much fun and
occasionally quite hazardous. Because the farther down
you go, the bigger and scalier the turtles get, with sharper
and sharper beaks. Until eventually they start looking less
like turtles and more like dragons.
“Everyone take a marble, please, as you go.”
The very next afternoon March taught them a simple chant
to say over their marbles in a crooked gypsy-sounding
language that Quentin didn’t recognize (later Alice told him
it was Estonian), accompanied by a tricky gesture that
involved moving the middle and pinky fingers on both hands
independently, which is a lot harder than it sounds. Thosewho completed it successfully could leave early, the rest
had to stay until they got it right. How would they know when
they got it right? They would know.
Quentin stayed until his voice was hoarse and his fingers
were on fire, until the light in the windows had softened and
changed color and then sunk away completely, until his
empty stomach ached, and dinner had been served and
cleared away in the distant dining room. He stayed until his
face was warm with shame, and all but four other people
had stood up—some of them pumped their fists in the air
and said yesssss!!! —and left the classroom. Alice had
been the first, after about twenty minutes, though she left
silently. Finally Quentin said the chant and made the
motions—he didn’t even know what he did differently this
time—and was rewarded by the sight of his marble
wobbling, very slightly but unmistakably, of its own volition.
He didn’t say anything, just put his head down on his
desk, hiding his face in the crook of his elbow, and let the
blood in his head throb in the darkness. The wooden desk
was cool on his cheek. It hadn’t been a fluke, or a hoax, or a
joke. He had done it. Magic was real, and he could do it.
And now that he could, my God, there was so much of it
to do. That glass marble would be Quentin’s constant
companion for the rest of the semester. It was the cold,
pitiless glass heart of Professor March’s approach to
magical pedagogy. Every lecture, every exercise, every
demonstration was concerned with how to manipulate and
transform it using magic. For the next four months Quentin
was required to carry his marble everywhere. He fingered
his marble under the table at dinner. It nestled in the inside
pockets of his Brakebills jacket. When he showered, he
tucked it in the soap dish. He took it to bed with him, and on
those rare occasions when he slept he dreamed about it.
Quentin learned to cool his marble until it frosted over. He
caused it to roll around a table by invisible means. He
learned to float his marble in midair. He made it glow from
within. Because it was already transparent it was easy torender invisible, upon which he promptly lost it and
Professor March had to rematerialize it for him. Quentin
made his marble float in water, pass through a wooden
barrier, fly through an obstacle course and attract iron
filings like a magnet. This was nuts-and-bolts work, ground-
level fundamentals. The dramatic spellcasting display
Quentin had performed during his exam, however showy
and satisfying, he was told, was a well-understood
anomaly, a flare-up of accumulated power that often
manifested during a sorcerer’s first casting. It would be
years before he could do anything comparable again.
In the meantime Quentin also studied the history of
magic, about which even magicians knew less than he
would have thought. It turned out that magic-users had
always lived within mainstream society, but apart from it
and largely unknown to it. The towering figures of magical
history weren’t famous at all in the mundane world, and the
obvious guesses were way off base. Leonardo, Roger
Bacon, Nostradamus, John Dee, Newton—sure, all of them
were mages of various stripes, but of relatively modest
ability. The fact that they were famous in mainstream circles
was just a strike against them. By the standards of magical
society they’d fallen at the first hurdle: they hadn’t had the
basic good sense to keep their shit to themselves.
Quentin’s other homework, Popper’s Practical Exercises
for Young Magicians, turned out to be a thin, large-format
volume containing a series of hideously complex finger and
voice exercises arranged in order of increasing difficulty
and painfulness. Much of spellcasting, Quentin gathered,
consisted of very precise hand gestures accompanied by
incantations to be spoken or chanted or whispered or
yelled or sung. Any slight error in the movement or in the
incantation would weaken, or negate, or pervert the spell.
This wasn’t Fillory. In each of the Fillory novels one or two
of the Chatwin children were always taken under the wing of
a kindly Fillorian mentor who taught them a skill or a craft. In
The World in the Walls Martin becomes a masterhorseman and Helen trains as a kind of forest scout; in The
Flying Forest Rupert becomes a deadeye archer; in A
Secret Sea Fiona trains with a master fencer; and so on.
The process of learning is a nonstop orgy of wonderment.
Learning magic was nothing like that. It turned out to be
about as tedious as it was possible for the study of
powerful and mysterious supernatural forces to be. The
same way a verb has to agree with its subject, it turned out,
even the simplest spell had to be modified and tweaked
and inflected to agree with the time of day, the phase of the
moon, the intention and purpose and precise
circumstances of its casting, and a hundred other factors,
all of which were tabulated in volumes of tables and charts
and diagrams printed in microscopic jewel type on huge
yellowing elephant-folio pages. And half of each page was
taken up with footnotes listing the exceptions and
irregularities and special cases, all of which had to be
committed to memory, too. Magic was a lot wonkier than
Quentin thought it would be.
But there was something else to it, too, something
beyond all the practicing and memorizing, beyond the
dotted i ’s and crossed t ’s, something that never came up in
March’s lectures. Quentin only sensed it, without really
being able to talk about it, but there was something else
you needed if a spell was going to get any purchase on the
world around you. Whenever he tried to think about it he got
lost in abstractions. It was something like force of will, a
certain intensity of concentration, a clear vision, maybe a
dash of artistic brio. If a spell was going to work, then on
some gut level you had to mean it.
He couldn’t explain it, but Quentin could tell when it was
working. He could sense his words and gestures getting
traction on the mysterious magical substrate of the
universe. He could feel it physically. His fingertips got
warm, and they seemed to leave trails in the air. There was
a slight resistance, as if the air were getting viscous around
him and pushing back against his hands and even againsthis lips and tongue. His mind buzzed with a caffeine-
cocaine fizz. He was at the heart of a large and powerful
system, he was its heart. When it was working, he knew it.
And he liked it.
Now that his friends had come back from vacation Eliot sat
with them at meals instead. They were a highly visible
clique, always earnestly conferring with each other and
having fits of obstreperous public laughter, conspicuously
fond of themselves and uninterested in the greater
Brakebills populace. There was something different about
them, though it was hard to say what. They weren’t better-
looking or smarter than anybody else. They just seemed to
know who they were, and they weren’t constantly looking
around at everybody else as if they could tell them.
It rankled the way Eliot had dropped Quentin the minute
he ceased to be convenient, but then there were the
nineteen other First Years to think of. Though they weren’t a
wildly social bunch. They were quiet and intense, always
eyeing each other assessingly, as if they were trying to
figure out who—if it came right down to it—would take out
who in an intellectual death match. They didn’t congregate
overmuch—they were always civil but rarely warm. They
were used to competing and used to winning. In other
words, they were like Quentin, and Quentin wasn’t used to
being around people like himself.
The one student he and every other First Year at
Brakebills was immediately obsessed with was little Alice,
of the tiny glass creature, but it quickly became apparent
that in spite of being way ahead of the rest of her year
academically she was cripplingly shy, to the point where
there wasn’t much point in trying to talk to her. When
approached at meals she answered questions in
whispered monosyllables, her gaze dropping to the
tablecloth in front of her as if weighed down by some infinite
inner shame. She was almost pathologically unable tomake eye contact, and she had a way of hiding her face
behind her hair that made it clear how agonizing it was for
her to be the object of human attention.
Quentin wondered who or what could possibly have
convinced somebody with such obvious gifts that she
should be frightened of other people. He wanted to keep up
a proper head of competitive steam, but instead he felt
almost protective of her. The one and only time he saw
Alice look genuinely happy was when he watched her,
alone and momentarily unself-conscious, successfully skip
a pebble across the pool in a fountain and between the
legs of a stone nymph.
Life at Brakebills had a hushed, formal, almost theatrical
tone to it, and at mealtimes formality was elevated to the
level of a fetish. Dinners were served promptly at six thirty;
latecomers were denied the privilege of a chair and ate
standing. Faculty and students sat together at one
interminable table that was swathed in a tablecloth of
mystical whiteness and laid with heavy-handled silverware
that didn’t match. Illumination was provided by battalions of
hideous candelabras. The food, contrary to private school
tradition, was excellent in an old-fashioned, Frenchified
way. Menus tended toward mid-century warhorses like
boeuf en daube and lobster thermidor. First Years had the
privilege of serving all the other students as waiters, under
the stern direction of Chambers, and then eating by
themselves when everybody else was done. Third and
Fourth Years were allowed one glass of wine with dinner;
Fifth Years (or “Finns,” as they were called, for no obvious
reason) got two. Oddly enough there were only ten Fourth
Years, half the usual number, and nobody would explain
why. Asking about it just ended the conversation.
All this Quentin picked up with the speed of a sailor cast
away on a savage foreign continent, who has no choice but
to learn the local language as rapidly as possible or be
devoured by those who speak it. His first two months at
Brakebills spun by, and soon red and gold leaves werescattering across the Sea, as if they were being pushed by
invisible brooms—which possibly they were?—and the
flanks of the slow-moving topiary beasts in the Maze
showed streaks of color.
Quentin devoted a half hour every day after class to
exploring the campus on foot. One blustery afternoon he
stumbled onto a pocket vineyard, a postage stamp of earth
ruled into straight lines and planted with rows of grapevines
strung up on rusty wires and trained into weird vinicultural
candelabra shapes. By now the grapes had already been
harvested, and those that hadn’t had shriveled on the vine
into tiny fragrant raisins.
Beyond it, a quarter mile off into the woods, at the end of
a narrow path, Quentin discovered a small field neatly
divided into a patchwork of squares. Some of the squares
were grass, some were stone, some were sand, some
were water, and two were made of blackened, silvery
metal, elaborately inscribed.
There was no fence or wall to mark the edge of the
grounds, or if there was he never found it. There was just
the river along one side and woods all around the rest.
Even so the faculty seemed to spend an inordinate amount
of time maintaining the spells that kept the school invisible
and impregnable to outsiders. They were constantly
strolling the perimeter, studying things Quentin couldn’t see,
and pulling one another out of classes to consult about it.SNOW
One afternoon in late October Professor March asked
Quentin to stay behind after Practical Applications. P.A.—
as everybody called it—was the part of the day when the
students worked on actual spellcasting. was the part of the
day when the students worked on actual spellcasting. They
were allowed to attempt only the most basic magic at this
stage, under smotheringly close supervision, but still. It was
a small practical reward for all those oceans of theory they
were navigating.
That particular class had not been a successful one for
Quentin. P.A. was held in a room that resembled a college
chemistry lab: indestructible gray stone tables; counters
mottled with ancient unspeakable stains; deep, capacious
sinks. The air was thickly charged with permanent charms
and wards installed by generations of Brakebills professors
to prevent students from injuring themselves or each other.
It carried a whiff of ozone.
Quentin watched his lab partner Surendra dust his hands
with a white powder (equal parts flour and beech-wood
ash), draw certain invisible sigils in the air with a freshly
trimmed willow wand, and then bring the wand softly down
on his marble (nickname: Rakshasa!), slicing it neatly in
half with one stroke, first try. But when Quentin brought the
willow wand down on his marble (nickname: Martin) it burst
with a quiet pop, like a dying lightbulb, throwing off a spray
of glass chunks and powder. Quentin dropped the wand
and spun away to shield his eyes; everybody else in the
room craned their heads to look. The atmosphere in the
P.A. room wasn’t particularly collegial.
So Quentin was already in a foul mood when Professor
March asked him to stay behind after class. March chatted
with stragglers in the hall while Quentin sat on one of the
indestructible tables, swinging his legs and thinking black
thoughts. He was somewhat reassured that Alice had beenasked to stay behind, too. She sat by the window staring
dreamily out at the sluggish Hudson. Her marble floated in
slow circles around her head, a lazy miniature satellite,
sometimes clicking against the glass when she leaned too
close. Why did magic come to her so effortlessly? he
wondered. Or was it as effortless as it looked? He couldn’t
believe it was as hard for her as it was for him. Penny was
there, too, looking pale and intense and moon-faced as
always. He wore the Brakebills uniform, but they’d let him
keep his mohawk.
Professor March came back in, followed by Professor
Van der Weghe. She didn’t mince words.
“We asked you three to stay behind because we are
considering advancing you to Second Year for the spring
term,” she said. “You would have to do some extra work on
your own in order to pass your First Year exams in
December and then catch up to the Second Years, but I
think you’re up to it. Am I right?”
She looked around encouragingly. She wasn’t really
asking them so much as telling them. Quentin and Penny
and Alice glanced at one another uneasily and looked away
again. From long experience Quentin had learned not to be
surprised when his intellectual abilities were rated over
other people’s, and this mark of favor certainly wiped out
the nightmare of his pulverized marble, with interest. But
everybody was acting very solemn and serious about it. It
sounded like a lot of work for the privilege of skipping a
year at Brakebills, which he wasn’t even sure he wanted to
do anyway.
“Why?” Penny spoke up. “Why move us up? Are you
going to move other students down to make room for us?”
He had a point. It was an immutable fact of life at
Brakebills that there were always twenty students per class,
no more and no fewer.
“Different students learn at different speeds, Penny,” was
all she said. “We want to keep everybody where they’remost comfortable.”
There were no further questions. After a suitable interval
Professor Van der Weghe accepted their silence as
consent.
“All right then,” she said. “Good luck to all of you.”
Those words plunged Quentin into a new and darker
phase of his life at Brakebills, just when he’d gotten
comfortable with the old one. Until then he’d worked hard,
but he got in his share of malingering like everybody else.
He wandered around campus and killed time with the other
First Years in the First Years’ lounge, which was a shabby
but cozy room with a fireplace and an assortment of
critically injured couches and armchairs and
embarrassingly lame “educational” board games, basically
magical versions of Trivial Pursuit, all warped and stained
and missing crucial pieces and cards and spinners. They
even had a contraband video-game console set up in a
closet, a three-year-old box hooked up to an even older TV.
It fuzzed out and rebooted whenever anybody fired up a
spell within two hundred yards of it, which was pretty much
constantly.
That was before. Now there was no time when Quentin
wasn’t studying. As often as Eliot had warned him about
what he was in for, and as hard as he’d worked up till now,
he still somehow imagined that learning magic would turn
out to be a delightful journey through a secret garden where
he would gaily pluck the heavy fruit of knowledge from
conveniently low-hanging branches. Instead every afternoon
after P.A. Quentin went straight to the library to rush through
his regular homework so he could betake himself after
dinner to the library, where his appointed tutor waited for
him.
His tutor was Professor Sunderland, the pretty young
woman who had asked him to draw maps during his
Examination. She looked nothing like a magician was
supposed to: she was blond and dimply and distractingly
curvy. Professor Sunderland taught mostly upper-levelcourses, Fourth and Fifth Years, and didn’t have much
patience for amateurs. She drilled him relentlessly on
gestures and incantations and charts and tables, and when
he was perfect, that was a start, but she’d like to see
Popper etudes No. 7 and No. 13 again, please, slowly,
forward and then backward, just to make sure. Her hands
did things Quentin couldn’t imagine his hands ever doing. It
would have been intolerable if Quentin didn’t have a
ferocious crush on Professor Sunderland.
He almost felt like he was betraying Julia. But what did
he owe her? It’s not like she even would have cared. And
Professor Sunderland was here. He wanted somebody
who was part of his new world. Julia had her chance.
Quentin spent a lot more of his time with Alice and Penny
now. Brakebills had an eleven-o’clock lights-out policy for
First Years, but with their extra workload the three of them
had to find a way around it. Fortunately there was a small
study off one of the student wings that, according to
Brakebills lore, was exempt from whatever monitoring
spells the faculty used to enforce curfew. Probably they left
it like that deliberately as a loophole for situations like this.
It was a leftover space—musty, windowless, and
trapezoidal—but it had a couch and a table and chairs, and
the faculty never checked it after hours, so that was where
Quentin, Alice, and Penny went when the rest of the First
Years went to bed.
They made an odd little tribe: Alice sitting hunched over
the table; Quen tin sprawled on the couch; Penny pacing in
circles, or sitting cross-legged on the floor. The odious
Popper books were hexed in such a way that you could
practice in front of them and they would tell you if you’d
screwed up or not by turning green (good) or red (bad),
although annoyingly they wouldn’t tell you how you’d
screwed up.
But Alice always knew how you screwed up. Of the three
of them she was the prodigy, with preternaturally flexible
hands and wrists and a freakish memory. When it came tolanguages she was omnivorous and insatiable. While her
classmates were still wallowing in the shallows of Middle
English, she was already plunging into Arabic and Aramaic
and Old High Dutch and Old Church Slavonic. She was still
painfully shy, but the late nights she spent with Quentin and
Penny in the after-hours room wore away some of her
reserve, to the point where she would sometimes exchange
notes and pointers with the other two. Once in a while she
even revealed a sense of humor, though more often than
not she made her jokes in Old Church Slavonic.
They probably would have been lost on Penny anyway.
He had no sense of humor at all. He practiced by himself,
murmuring and watching his pale hands sign and flutter in a
massive baroque gilt-framed mirror leaned up against the
wall. The mirror had an old, fading, forgotten enchantment
on it, so Penny’s reflection was sometimes replaced with
an image of a treeless green hillside, a smooth grassy
curve under an overcast sky. It was like a TV with a poorly
installed cable box, picking up a stray image from far away,
some other world.
Rather than take a break, Penny would just wait silently
and impassively for the image to change back. Secretly the
mirror made Quentin nervous, as if something horrible were
about to come strolling over the top of that hill, or was
buried restlessly underneath it.
“I wonder where it is,” Alice said. “In real life.”
“I don’t know,” Quentin said. “Maybe it’s in Fillory.”
“You could climb through. That’s always how it works in
the books.”
“How great would that be? Think about it: we could go
through and study for a month and come back and ace this
thing.”
“Please don’t tell me you’re going to go to Fillory so you
can get more homework done,” Alice said. “Because that
would be the saddest thing I’ve ever heard.”“A little quiet, people,” Penny said.
For a punk Penny could be an unbelievable drag.
Winter descended, a deep, bitter-cold Hudson Valley
winter. The fountains froze over, and the Maze was traced
in white snow, except where the topiary animals shivered
and humped up and shook it off. Quentin and Alice and
Penny found themselves drawing apart from their
classmates, who regarded them with envy and resentment
that Quentin didn’t have the time or energy to deal with. For
the time being they were their own exclusive club within the
already closed club of Brakebills.
Quentin was rediscovering his love of work. It wasn’t
really a thirst for knowledge that kept him going, or any
desire to live up to Professor Van der Weghe’s belief that
he belonged in Second Year. It was mostly just the familiar,
perverse satisfaction of repetitive, backbreaking labor, the
same masochistic pleasure that had enabled him to master
the Mills Mess pattern and the faro shuffle and the Charlier
cut and to lay waste to Calculus 2 when he was still in
eighth grade.
A few of the older students took pity on the three
marathon crammers. They adopted them as mascots the
way a class of kindergartners would adopt a family of
gerbils. They egged them on and brought them snacks and
sodas after hours. Even Eliot condescended to visit,
bringing with him a set of illegal charms and talismans for
staying awake and reading faster, though it was hard to tell
whether they worked or not. They were procured, he said,
from a seedy itinerant salesman who turned up at
Brakebills once or twice a year in an old wood-paneled
station wagon crammed with junk.
December slid by on silent runners, in a sleepless dream
of constant toil. The work had lost all connection to
whatever goal it was supposed to be accomplishing. Even
Quentin’s sessions with Professor Sunderland lost their
spark. He caught himself staring bleakly at the radiant
upper slopes of her achingly full and gropable breasts whenhe knew he should be devoting himself to far more pressing
technical issues like correct thumb position. His crush went
from exciting to depressing, as if he’d gone from the first
blush of infatuation to the terminal nostalgia of a former
lover without even the temporary relief of an actual
relationship in between.
Now he floated through Professor March’s lectures from
the back row, feeling lofty contempt for his classmates, who
were only on Popper etude No. 27, when he had already
scaled the glorious heights of No. 51 and watched it grow
tiny beneath his still-climbing feet. He began to hate the the
grungy misshapen room where he and Penny and Alice did
their late-night cramming. He hated the bitter, burned smell
of the coffee they drank, to the point where he almost felt
tempted to try the low-grade speed Penny took as an
alternative. He recognized the irritable, unpleasant,
unhappy person he was becoming: he looked strangely like
the Quentin he thought he’d left behind in Brooklyn.
Quentin didn’t do all his studying in the trapezoidal spare
room. On weekends he could work wherever he wanted, at
least during the daytime. Mostly he stayed in his own room,
but sometimes he climbed the long spiral staircase up to
the Brakebills observatory, a respectable if antiquated
facility at the top of one of the towers. It contained a
massive late-nineteenth-century telescope the size of a
telephone pole, poking up at an angle through a tarnished
copper dome. Somebody on the staff must have been
deeply in love with this obsolete instrument, because it
floated on an exquisitely complicated array of brass gears
and joints that was kept freshly oiled and in a state of high
polish.
Quentin liked to read in the observatory because it was
high up and well heated and relatively unfrequented: not
only was it hard to get to, the telescope was useless duringthe day. This was usually enough to secure him an
afternoon of lofty, wintry solitude. But on one Saturday in
late November he discovered that he wasn’t the only one
who’d figured this out. When Quentin reached the top of the
spiral staircase, the trapdoor was already open. He poked
his head up into the circular, amber-lit room.
It was like he’d poked his head into another world, an
alien planet that looked eerily like his own, but rearranged.
The interloper was Eliot. He was kneeling like a supplicant
in front of an old orange armchair with ripped upholstery
that stood in the middle of the room, in the center of the
circular track that the telescope ran on. Quentin always
wondered who had gotten the chair up there in the first
place and why they’d bothered—magic was obviously
involved, since it wouldn’t have fit through the trapdoor, or
even any of the tiny windows.
Eliot wasn’t alone. There was somebody sitting in the
chair. The angle was bad, but he thought it was one of the
Second Years, an unexceptional, smooth-cheeked kid with
straight rust-colored hair. Quentin barely knew him. His
name might have been Eric.
“No,” Eric said, and then again sharply: “No! Absolutely
not.” He was smiling. Eliot started to stand up, but the boy
held him down playfully by his shoulders. He wasn’t
especially large. The authority he exercised over Eliot
wasn’t physical.
“You know the rules,” he said, like he was speaking to a
child.
“Please? Just this once?” Quentin had never heard Eliot
speak in that pleading, wheedling infantile tone before.
“Please?” It was not a tone he had ever expected to hear
Eliot speak in.
“Absolutely not!” Eric touched the tip of Eliot’s long, pale
nose with his finger. “Not until you finish all your chores.
Every single one. And take off that stupid shirt, it’s
pathetic.”Quentin got that it was a game they’d played before. He
was watching a very private ritual.
“All right, ” Eliot said petulantly. “And there is nothing
wrong with this shirt,” he muttered.
Eric cut him off with a look. Then he spat, once, a white
fleck on Eliot’s pristine shirtfront. Quentin saw the fear
behind Eric’s eyes as he wondered if he’d gone too far.
From this angle the armchair might have blocked Quentin’s
view, but it didn’t quite as Eliot fumbled jinglingly with Eric’s
belt buckle, then his fly, then jerked down his pants,
exposing his thin, pale thighs.
“Careful,” Eric warned. There wasn’t much affection in his
playacting, if that’s what it was. “Little bitch. You know the
rules.”
Quentin couldn’t have said why he waited an extra minute
before he ducked back down the ladder, back into his
staid, predictable home universe, but he couldn’t stop
watching. He was looking directly at the exposed wiring of
Eliot’s emotional machinery. How could he not have known
about this? He wondered if it was an annual thing, maybe
Eliot went through a boy or two a year, anointing them and
then discarding them when they no longer did the trick. Did
he really have to hide like this? Even at Brakebills? On
some level Quentin was hurt: If this was what Eliot wanted,
why hadn’t he come after Quentin? Though as much as he
longed for Eliot’s attention, he didn’t know if he could have
gone through with it. It was better this way. Eliot wouldn’t
have forgiven him for refusing.
The desperate hunger with which Eliot regarded the
object on which he would perform his chores was unlike
anything Quentin had ever seen. He was right in Eliot’s line
of sight, but he never once glanced over at him.
Quentin decided he would do his reading elsewhere.He finished Lady Amelia Popper’s Practical Exercises for
Young Magicians, Vol. 1, at midnight the night before the
exam, a Sunday. He carefully closed the book and sat for a
minute staring at the cover. His hands shook. His head felt
spinny and weightless. His body was unnaturally heavy. He
couldn’t stay where he was, but he was too wired to go to
bed either. He heaved himself up from the broken-backed
couch and announced that he was going for a walk.
To his surprise Alice offered to come with him. Penny just
stared at the green, overcast landscape in the mirror,
waiting for his pale, stoic face to reappear so he could
keep practicing. He didn’t look up as they left.
Quentin’s idea had been to walk out through the Maze
and across the snowbound Sea to its outer edge, where he
had first arrived, and look back at the hushed hulk of the
House and think about why this was turning out to be so
much less fun than it should have been and try to calm down
enough to go to sleep. He supposed he could do that
equally well with Alice as he could alone. He headed for the
tall French doors that opened onto the back terrace.
“Not that way,” Alice said.
After hours the French doors were set to trigger a
magical alert in the bedroom of whatever faculty member
was on call, Infallible Alice explained, to discourage
students from breaking curfew. She led him around to a
side door he’d never seen before, unalarmed and
concealed behind a tapestry, that opened out into a snow-
covered hedge. They squeezed themselves through it and
into the freezing darkness.
Quentin was easily eight inches taller than Alice, most of
it in his legs, but she kept pace with him doggedly. They
navigated the Maze together in the moonlight and set out
across the frozen Sea. The snow was half a foot deep, and
they kicked little spills of it ahead of them as they walked.
“I come out here every night,” Alice said, breaking thesilence.
In his sleep-deprived state Quentin had almost forgotten
she was there.
“Every night?” he said stupidly. “You do? Why?”
“Just . . . you know.” She sighed. Her breath puffed out
white in the moonlight. “To clear my head. It gets noisy in
the girls’ tower. You can’t think. It’s quiet out here.”
It was strange how normal it felt to be alone with the
usually antisocial Alice. “It’s cold out here. You think they
know you break curfew?”
“Of course. Fogg does, anyway.”
“So if he knows, why bother—”
“Why bother taking the side door?” The Sea was like a
smooth clean sheet laid out around them, tucked in at the
corners. Except for a few deer and wild turkeys, nobody
else had been across it since the last snowfall. “I don’t think
he really cares that much if we sneak out. But he
appreciates it if you make an effort.”
They reached the edge of the great lawn and turned and
looked back toward the House. One light was on, a
teacher’s bedroom on a lower floor. An owl called. A hazy
moon bleached the clouds white above the blocky outline of
the roof. The scene was like an unshaken snow globe.
Quentin flashed on a memory from the Fillory books: the
part in The World in the Walls when Martin and Fiona go
wandering through the frozen woods looking for the trees
the Watcherwoman has enchanted, each of which has a
round ticking clock embedded in its trunk. As villains went
the Watcherwoman was an odd specimen, since she rarely
did anything particularly evil, or at any rate not where
anybody could see her do it. She was usually glimpsed
from a distance, rushing around with a book in one hand
and an elaborate timepiece in the other; sometimes she
drove a terrifyingly elaborate ormolu clock-carriage thatticked loudly as it raced along. She always wore a veil that
covered her face. Wherever she passed she planted her
signature clock-trees.
Quentin caught himself listening for ticking, but there was
no sound except for an occasional frozen crack from deep
in the forest, its origin unguessable.
“This is where I came through the first time,” he said. “In
the summer. I didn’t even know what Brakebills was. I
thought I was in Fillory.”
Alice laughed: a surprising, hilarious shout. Quentin
hadn’t actually meant it to be quite that funny.
“Sorry,” she said. “God, I used to love those books when I
was little.”
“So where did you come through?”
“Over there.” She pointed at an another, identical stretch
of trees. “But I didn’t come through like you. I mean, through
a portal.”
They must have had some special, extra-magical form of
conveyance for Infallible Alice, he thought. It was hard not to
envy her. A phantom toll-booth, or a chariot of fire, probably.
Drawn by thestrals.
“When I came, I walked here? I wasn’t Invited?” She was
talking in questions, with exaggerated casualness, but her
voice was suddenly wobbly. “I had a brother who went here.
I always wanted to come, too, but they never Invited me.
After a while I was getting too old, so I ran away. I’d been
waiting and waiting for an Invitation and it never came. I
knew I’d already missed the first year. I’m a year older than
you, you know.”
He hadn’t known. She looked younger.
“So I took a bus from Urbana to Poughkeepsie, then
taxis from there, as far as I could. Did you ever notice
there’s no driveway here? No roads either. The nearest one
is the state highway.” This was the longest speech Quentinhad ever heard Alice make. “I had them let me off on the
shoulder, in the middle of nowhere. I had to walk the last
five miles. I got lost. Slept in the woods.”
“You slept in the woods? Like on the ground?”
“I know, I should have brought a tent. Or something. I
don’t know what I was thinking, I was just hysterical.”
“What about your brother? He couldn’t let you in?”
“He died.”
She offered this neutrally, purely informationally, but it
brought Quen tin up short. He had never imagined that
Alice could have a sibling, let alone a dead one. Or that she
led anything other than a charmed life.
“Alice,” he said, “this doesn’t make any sense. You do
realize you’re the smartest person in our class?”
She shrugged off the compliment with one shoulder,
staring fiercely up at the House.
“So you just walked in? What did they do?”
“They couldn’t believe it. Nobody’s supposed to be able
to find the House by themselves. They thought it was just an
accident, but it’s so obvious there’s old magic here, tons of
it. This whole place is wild with it—if you look at it through
the right spells, it lights up like a forest fire.
“They must have thought I was a homeless person. I had
twigs in my hair. I’d been crying all night. Professor Van der
Weghe felt sorry for me. She gave me coffee and let me
take the entrance Exam all by myself. Fogg didn’t want to
let me, but she made him.”
“And you passed.”
She shrugged again.
“I still don’t get it,” Quentin said. “Why didn’t you get
Invited like the rest of us?”
She didn’t answer, just stared up angrily at the hazymoon. There were tears on her cheeks. He realized that he
had just casually put into words what was probably the
overwhelming question of Alice’s entire existence at
Brakebills. It occurred to him, long after it should have, that
he wasn’t the only person here who had problems and felt
like an outsider. Alice wasn’t just the competition, someone
whose only purpose in life was to succeed and by doing so
subtract from his happiness. She was a person with her
own hopes and feelings and history and nightmares. In her
own way she was as lost as he was.
They were standing in the shadow of an enormous fir
tree, a shaggy blue-gray monster groaning with snow. It
made Quentin think of Christmas, and he suddenly realized
that they’d missed it. He’d forgotten they were on Brakebills
time. Real Christmas, in the rest of the world, had been two
months ago, and he hadn’t even noticed. His parents had
said something about it on the phone, but the dime hadn’t
dropped. Funny how things like that stopped mattering. He
wondered what James and Julia had done for vacation.
They’d talked about all of them going up to Lake Placid
together. Her parents had a cabin there.
And what did matter? It was starting to snow again, fine
particles settling on his eyelashes. What the hell was out
there that was worth all this work? What were they doing it
for? Power, he supposed, or knowledge. But it was all so
ridiculously abstract. The answer should have been
obvious. He just couldn’t quite name it.
Next to him Alice shuddered from the cold. She hugged
herself.
“Well, I’m glad you’re here now, however you got here,”
Quentin said awkwardly. “We all are.” He put an arm around
her hunched shoulders. If she didn’t lean into him, or in any
way admit to being comforted, she didn’t have a seizure
either, which he was half afraid she would. “Come on, let’s
get back before Fogg really does get pissed. And we’ve
got an exam tomorrow. You don’t want to be too tired to
enjoy it.”They took the test the next morning, on the Monday of the
third week in December. It was two hours of essays and
two hours of practical exercises. There wasn’t much actual
spellcasting. Mostly Quentin sat in a bare classroom while
three examiners, two from Brakebills and one external (she
had a German accent, or maybe Swiss), listened to him
recite Middle English incantations and identify spell forms
and watched him try to make perfect circles of different
sizes in the empty air, in different directions, with different
fingers, while still more powdery snow sifted soundlessly
down from the white sky outside. It was almost
anticlimactic.
The results were slipped under each of their doors early
the following morning, on a piece of thick cream paper that
looked like a wedding invitation, folded over once. Quentin
had passed, Alice had passed, and Penny had failed.THE MISSING BOY
Brakebills let out for the last two weeks of December. At
first Quentin wasn’t sure why he was so terrified of going
home until he real ized that it wasn’t home he was worried
about per se. He was worried that if he left Brakebills they’d
never let him back in. He would never find his way back
again—they would close the secret door to the garden
behind him, and lock it, and its outline would be lost forever
among the vines and the stonework, and he would be
trapped out in the real world forever.
In the end he went home for five days. And for a moment,
as he was climbing the front stairs, and the good old
familiar home smell descended on him, a lethal
enchantment compounded of cooking and paint and
Oriental rugs and dust, when he saw his mother’s toothy,
exasperated smile and his dad’s hale, stubbly good humor,
he became the person that he used to be around them
again, and he felt the gravitational pull of the little kid he
once was and in some unswept back corner of his soul
always would be. He gave in to the old illusion that he’d
been wrong to leave, that this was the life he should be
living.
But the spell didn’t hold. He couldn’t stay. Something
about his parents’ house was unbearable to him now. After
his little curved tower-top room, how could he go back to
his dingy old bedroom in Brooklyn with its crumbly white
paint and its iron bars on the window and its view of a tiny
walled-in dirt patch? He had nothing to say to his well-
meaning, politely curious parents. Both their attention and
their neglect were equally intolerable. His world had
become complicated and interesting and magical. Theirs
was mundane and domestic. They didn’t understand that
the world they could see wasn’t the one that mattered, and
they never would.
He came home on a Thursday. On Friday he textedJames, and on Saturday morning he met up with James
and Julia at an abandoned boat launch on the Gowanus. It
was hard to say why they liked this place, except that it was
roughly equidistant from their homes and fairly secluded—it
was at the end of a dead-end street that butted up against
the canal, and you had to climb over a corrugated-metal
barrier to get to it. It had the quiet stillness of any place that
was close to open water, however stagnant and poisonous
that water might be. There was a kind of concrete
barricade you could sit on while you troubled the viscous
surface of the Gowanus with handfuls of stray gravel. A
burnt-out brick warehouse with arched windows loomed
over the scene from the opposite bank. Somebody’s future
luxury condo.
It was good to see James and Julia again, but it was
even better to see himself seeing them, and to see how
much he had changed. Brakebills had rescued him. He was
no longer the shoe-gazing fuck-up he’d been the day he left,
James’s sidekick and Julia’s inconvenient suitor. When he
and James exchanged their gruff hellos and cursory
handshake-hugs, he didn’t feel that instinctive deference he
used to feel around James, as if he were the hero of the
piece and not Quentin. When he saw Julia, he searched
himself for the old love he used to feel for her. It wasn’t
gone, but it was a dull, distant ache, still there but healed
over—just the shrapnel they couldn’t remove.
It hadn’t occurred to Quentin that they might not be
completely glad to see him. He knew he’d left abruptly,
without explanation, but he had no idea how hurt and
betrayed they would feel. They all sat together, three in a
row, looking out at the water, as Quentin extemporized a
breezy account of the obscure but still highly selective
educational institution that he was for some reason
attending. He kept the curriculum as vague as possible. He
focused on architectural details. James and Julia huddled
together stiffly against the March chill (it was March now in
Brooklyn) like an elderly married couple on a park bench.
When it was his turn, James rattled on about seniorprojects, the prom, teachers Quentin hadn’t thought about
once in six months—it was incredible that all this stuff was
still going on, and that James still cared about it, and that
he couldn’t see how everything had changed. Once magic
was real everything else just seemed so unreal.
And Julia—something had happened to his delicate,
freckly Julia while he was away. Was it just that he didn’t
love her anymore? Was he seeing her clearly for the first
time? But no, her hair was longer now, and it was flat and
lank—she had done something to tamp down the waviness
—and there were dark circles under her eyes that hadn’t
been there before. Before she only ever smoked at parties,
but now she lit cigarette after cigarette, one off the other,
feeding each one down the end of a hollow steel fencepost
when she was done. Even James seemed unnerved by her,
tense and protective. She observed them both coolly, her
black skirt blowing around her bare knees. Afterward he
couldn’t have said for sure whether she’d even spoken at
all.
That night, already jonesing for a taste of the magical
world he’d just left, Quentin rifled through his old
paperbacks for a Fillory novel and stayed up till three in the
morning rereading The Flying Forest, one of the more
incidental, less satisfying installments in the series, which
featured Rupert, the goofy, feckless Chatwin brother. He
and pretty, princessy Fiona find their way into Fillory via the
upper branches of Rupert’s favorite climbing tree and
spend the novel searching for the source of a ticking sound
that’s keeping their friend Sir Hotspots (he’s a leopard, with
exceptionally sharp ears) from sleeping.
The culprits turn out to be a tribe of dwarves who have
hollowed out an entire mountain of copper-bearing rock
and fashioned it into an immense timekeeping device
(Quentin had never noticed before how obsessed Plover
was with clockwork). In the end Rupert and Fiona enlist a
friendly giant to simply bury the clock deeper with his
enormous mattock, muffling its monstrous ticking noise,
thereby mollifying both Sir Hotspots and the dwarves, who,as cave dwellers, liked being buried. Then they repair to the
royal residence, Castle Whitespire, an elegant keep
cunningly constructed as a giant clockwork mechanism.
Wound by windmills, a great brass main-spring beneath the
castle moved and rotated its towers in a slow, stately
dance.
Now that he had been to Brakebills and knew something
about real magic he could read Plover with a more critical
eye. He wanted to know the technical details behind the
spells. And why were the dwarves building that giant clock
in the first place? And the denouement didn’t strike him as
especially final—it reminded him too much of “The Tell-Tale
Heart.” Nothing stays buried forever. And where was the
flying forest in The Flying Forest ? Where were Ember and
Umber, the stately twin rams who patrolled Fillory and kept
order there? Though they rarely showed up till after the
Chatwins had already taken care of things for them. Their
real function seemed to be to make sure the Chatwins
didn’t overstay their welcome—it was Ember and Umber
who regularly evicted them and sent them back to England
at the end of each book. It was Quentin’s least favorite thing
about the series. Why couldn’t they just let them stay?
Would that have been so bad?
It was obvious that Christopher Plover didn’t know
anything about real magic. He wasn’t even really English:
according to the flap copy he was an American who’d
made a quick fortune in dry goods in the 1920s and moved
to Cornwall just ahead of the stock market crash. A
confirmed bachelor, as the saying goes, he embraced
Anglophilia, began pronouncing his name the English way
(“Pluvver”), and set himself up as a country squire in a vast
home crammed with staff. (Only an American Anglophile
could have created a world as definitively English, more
English than England, as Fillory.) Legend had it that there
actually was a family of Chatwin children, who lived next
door to him. Plover always claimed that the Chatwin
children would come over and tell him stories about Fillory,
and that he just wrote them down.But the real mystery of The Flying Forest, endlessly
analyzed by zealous fans and slumming academics, lay in
the final few pages. With the ticking problem taken care of,
Rupert and Fiona are settling down to a celebratory feast
with Sir Hotspots and his family—including an appealingly
slinky leopard bride and any number of adorable fuzzy
leopard kittens—when who should turn up but Martin, the
eldest Chatwin child, who first discovered Fillory two books
ago in The World in the Walls .
Martin is thirteen years old by now, a pubescent
teenager, almost too old to be adventuring in Fillory. In
earlier books he was a changeful character, whose moods
swung from cheerful to black without warning. In The Flying
Forest he’s in his depressive phase. It’s not long before he
picks a fight with the younger, more dependably sunny
Rupert. Some very English yelling and wrestling ensues.
The Hotspots clan observes the proceedings with amused
leopardly coolth. Breaking away, his shirt untucked and
missing a button, Martin shouts at his siblings that it was he
who had discovered Fillory, and it was he and not they who
should have gotten to go on the adventure. And it wasn’t
fair: Why did they always have to go home afterward? He
was a hero in Fillory and nothing at home. Fiona icily tells
him not to behave like a child. Martin stalks away into the
dense Darkling Woods, weeping wimpy English schoolboy
tears.
And then . . . he never returns. Fillory swallows him whole.
Martin is absent from the next two books— A Secret Sea
and the last book in the series, The Wandering Dune —
and although his siblings hunt for him diligently, they never
find him again. (Now it made Quentin think of poor Alice’s
brother.) Like most fans Quentin assumed that Plover
meant to bring Martin back in the last book of the series,
restored and repentant, but Plover died unexpectedly in his
fifties while The Wandering Dune was still in manuscript,
and nothing in his papers ever suggested an answer to the
riddle. It was an insoluble literary mystery, like Dickens’sunfinished Mystery of Edwin Drood . Martin would always
remain the boy who vanished into Fillory and never came
back.
Quentin thought the answer might have been in the book
he’d possessed so briefly, The Magicians, but it was long
gone. He’d turned the House inside out and interrogated
everybody in it, and by this point he’d given up. Someone at
Brakebills must have taken it or tidied it up or lost it. But
who, and why? Maybe it hadn’t even been real.
Quentin woke up early that Sunday morning already in
fully fledged flight mode. He was spinning his wheels here.
He had his new life to get on with. Feeling only the barest
required minimum of guilt, he improvised an elaborate
fictional confection for his parents—rich roommate, ski
chalet in New Hampshire, I know it’s last minute but could
he please? More lies, but what could you do, that was how
you rolled when you were a secret teenage magician. He
packed hurriedly—he’d left most of his clothes at school
anyway—and half an hour later he was out on the streets of
Brooklyn. He went straight to the old community garden. He
walked into the thickest part of it.
He ended up at the back fence, looking through it at the
rusting play set in a neighbor’s yard. Could it really be this
small? He remembered the garden as practically a forest,
but now it looked thin and scraggly. For several minutes he
tramped around through the rubble and broken weeds and
pumpkin corpses frozen in the act of rotting, back and forth,
feeling more and more nervous and embarrassed. What
did he do last time? Did he need the book? He must be
missing something, but he couldn’t think what. The magic
wasn’t happening. He tried to retrace his steps exactly.
Maybe it was the wrong time of day.
Quentin went to get a slice of pizza and take stock,
praying that nobody he knew would walk by and see him
there when he was supposed to be on his way to Mount
Alibi in New Hampshire. He didn’t know what to do. The
trick wasn’t working. It was all falling away from him. He satthere in a booth with his bags next to him staring at his
reflection in the floor-to-ceiling mirrors—why do all pizzerias
have mirrored walls?—and reading the police blotter in the
Park Slope free weekly. The walls reflected each other,
mirrors on mirrors, an infinite curving gallery. And as he sat
there, the long, narrow, busy room became still around him,
almost without his knowing it. The mirrors became dark, the
light changed, the bare tile became a polished parquet
floor, and when he looked up from the paper again he was
eating his slice alone in the junior common room at
Brakebills.
Abruptly, with no fuss or ceremony, Alice and Quentin were
Second Years. Classes met in a semicircular room in a
back corner of the House. It was sunny but terrifyingly cold,
and the insides of the tall, paneled windows were
permanently iced over. In the mornings they were taught by
Professor Petitpoids, an ancient and slightly dotty Haitian
woman who wore a pointy black hat and made them
address her as “Witch” instead of “Professor.” Half the time
when someone asked her a question, she would just say,
“An it harm none, do what you will.” But when it came to the
practical requirements of working magic, her knobby walnut
fingers were even more technically proficient than
Professor Sunderland’s. In the afternoons, for P.A., they
had Professor Heckler, a long-haired, blue-jawed German
who was almost seven feet tall.
There was no particular rush to embrace the two
newcomers. The promotion had effectively turned Quentin
and Alice into a class of two: the First Years resented them
and the Second Years ignored them. Alice wasn’t the star
of the show anymore, the Second Years had stars of their
own, principally a loud, bluff, broad-shouldered girl with
straight dishwater hair named Amanda Orloff who was
regularly called on to demonstrate techniques for the class.
The daughter of a five-star Army general, she did magic ina gruff, unshowy, devastatingly competent way with her big,
blocky hands, as if she were solving an invisible Rubik’s
cube. Her thick fingers wrung the magic out of the air by
main force.
The other students all assumed Quentin and Alice were
friends already, and probably a couple, which in a funny
way had the effect of calling into being a bond between
them that hadn’t really had time to form yet. They were more
comfortable with each other since she’d told him the painful
secret of her arrival at Brakebills. She seemed to have
been liberated by her late-night confession: she didn’t
seem so fragile all the time—she didn’t always speak in
that tiny, whispery voice, and he could make fun of her, and
with some prompting he could get her to make fun of him,
too. He wasn’t sure they were friends, exactly, but she was
unfolding a little. He felt like a safecracker who—partly by
luck—had sussed out the first digit in a lengthy, arduous
combination.
One Sunday afternoon, tired of being shunned, Quentin
went and found his old lab partner Surendra and dragged
him out of the House for a walk. They wound their way out
through the Maze in their overcoats, headed nowhere in
particular, neither of them very enthusiastically. The sun was
out, but it was still painfully cold. The hedges were heavy
with melting ice, and snow was still piled up in the shadowy
corners. Surendra was the son of an immensely wealthy
Bengali-American computer executive from San Diego. His
round, beatific face belied the fact that he was the most
brutally sarcastic person Quentin had ever met.
Somehow on their way out to the Sea a Second Year girl
named Gretchen attached herself to them. Blond and long-
legged and slender, she was built like a prima ballerina
except for the fact that she had a severe, clunking limp—
something congenital having to do with a knee ligament—
and walked with a cane.
“Tally ho, boys.”
“It’s the gimp,” Quentin said.She wasn’t embarrassed about her leg. She told
anybody who would listen that that’s where her power came
from, and if she had it surgically corrected she wouldn’t be
able to do magic anymore. Nobody knew if it was true or
not.
They walked together as far as the edge of the grass, the
three of them, then stopped. Maybe this had been a
mistake, Quentin thought. None of them seemed to know
which way to go, or what they were doing there. Gretchen
and Surendra barely knew each other anyway. For a few
minutes they talked about nothing—gossip, exams,
teachers—but Surendra didn’t get any of the Second Year
references, and every time he missed one his sulk
deepened. The afternoon wobbled on its axis. Quentin
picked up a wet stone and threw it as far as he could. It
bounced silently on the grass. The wet made his ungloved
hand even colder.
“Walk this way!” Gretchen said finally, and struck off
across the Sea at an angle with her weird, rolling gait,
which despite its awkwardness covered a lot of ground.
Quentin wasn’t sure if he was supposed to laugh or not.
They walked down a narrow gravel path, through a thin
scrim of leafless poplar trees, and into a small clearing on
the very outer fringe of the grounds.
Quentin had been here before. He was looking at a
curious Alice-in-Wonderland playing field laid out in
squares, with a broad margin of lawn around it. The
squares were about a yard on a side, like a giant
chessboard, though the grid was longer than it was wide,
and the squares were different materials: water, stone,
sand, grass, and two squares made of silvery metal.
The grass squares were neatly trimmed, like a putting
green. The water squares were dark, glistening pools
reflecting the windblown blue sky overhead.
“What is this place?” he asked.“What do you mean, what is it,” Surendra said.
“Do you want to play?” Gretchen walked around to the
other side of the checkerboard, skirting the field. A tall
white-painted wooden chair stood at midfield, like a
lifeguard’s chair, or a judge’s chair at a tennis match.
“So this is a game?”
Surendra slit his eyes at him.
“Sometimes I really don’t get you,” he said. It was
dawning on him that he knew something Quentin didn’t.
Gretchen gave Surendra a conspiratorial look of shared
pity. She was one of those people who assumed an
attitude of instant intimacy with people she barely knew.
“This,” she said grandly, “is welters!”
Quentin was pretty much resigned to death by scorn. “So
it’s a game.”
“Oh, it’s so much more than a game,” Gretchen said.
“It’s a passion,” Surendra said.
“It’s a lifestyle.”
“It’s a state of mind.”
“I can explain it to you, if you have about ten years.”
Gretchen blew into her hands. “Basically one team stands
at one end and one team stands at the other end and you
try to capture squares.”
“How do you capture a square?”
Gretchen waggled her fingers in the air mysteriously.
“With maaaaagic! ”
“Where’s the broomsticks?” Quentin was only half joking.
“No broomsticks. Welters is more like chess. They
invented it about fifty million years ago. I think it was
originally supposed to be a teaching aid. And some people
say it was an alternative to dueling. Students kept killingeach other, so they got them playing welters instead.”
“Those were the days.”
Surendra tried a standing long jump over a water square,
but he slipped as he took off, shorted it, and caught one
heel in the water.
“Shit!” He looked up at the freezing blue sky. “I hate
welters!”
A crow took flight from the top of a winter elm. The sun
was subsiding behind the trees in a frozen swirl of pink
cirrus.
Surendra walked off the board, swinging his arms.
“I can’t feel my fingers. Let’s go in.”
They walked back down the path in the direction of the
Sea, not talking, just blowing on their hands and rubbing
them together. It was getting even colder as the sun went
down. The trees were already black against the sky. They
would have to hurry to change for dinner. A powerful feeling
of late-afternoon futility was descending on Quentin. A gang
of wild turkeys patrolled the edge of the forest, upright and
alert, looking oddly saurian and menacing, like a lost
squadron of velociraptors.
As they crossed the lawn Quentin found himself being
quizzed about Eliot.
“So are you really friends with that guy?” Surendra said.
“Yeah, how do you even know him?”
“I don’t really. He mostly hangs out with his own crowd.”
Quentin was secretly proud to be connected with Eliot, even
if in reality they hardly spoke to each other anymore.
“Yeah, I know,” Surendra said. “The Physical Kids. What
a bunch of losers.”
“What do you mean, Physical Kids?”
“You know, that whole clique. Janet Way and the fat one,Josh Hoberman—those guys. They all do physical magic
for their Disciplines.”
In the Maze their white breath streamed up against the
darkness of the box hedges. Surendra explained that
starting with the Third Year students chose a specific
magical topic to specialize in, or, more exactly, had it
chosen for them by the faculty. Then students were divided
into groups based on their specialties.
“It doesn’t matter that much, except that Disciplines map
loosely to social groups—people tend to hang out mostly
with their own kind. Physical’s supposed to be the rarest.
They’re a little snobby about it, I guess. And anyway Eliot,
you know about him.”
Gretchen raised her eyebrows and leered. His nose was
red from having been out in the cold. By now they had
reached the terrace, and the pink sunset was smeared
anamorphically all over the wavy glass in the French doors.
“No, I don’t think I do know,” Quentin said stiffly. “Why
don’t you tell me?”
“You don’t know?”
“Oh my God!” In ecstasy Gretchen put her hand on
Surendra’s arm. “I bet he’s one of Eliot’s—!”
At that moment the French doors opened and Penny
came striding quickly toward them, stiff-legged, his shirt
untucked, no jacket on. His pale round face came looming
up out of the dusk. His expression was blank and fixed, his
walk hyperanimated by a crazy energy. As he got closer he
took an extra little skip step, cocked his arm back, and
punched Quentin in the face.
Fighting was almost unheard of at Brakebills. Students
gossiped and politicked and sabotaged one another’s P.A.
experiments, but actual physical violence was vanishinglyrare. Back in Brooklyn Quentin had seen fights, but he
wasn’t the kind of guy who got mixed up in them. He wasn’t
a bully, and his height made it inconvenient for bullies to
pick on him. He didn’t have any siblings. He hadn’t been
seriously punched since elementary school.
There was a freeze-frame moment of Penny’s fist, close-
up and huge, like a comet passing dangerously close to the
Earth, and then a flashbulb went off in Quentin’s right eye. It
was a straight shot, and he half spun away and brought up
his hand to touch the spot in the universal gesture of I’ve-
just-been-punched-in-the-face. He was still trying to get his
mind around what had just happened when Penny hit him
again. This time Quentin ducked enough that he caught it
on his ear.
“Ow!” Quentin yelled, scrambling backward. “What the
hell?”
Dozens of windows looked out on the terrace from the
House, and Quentin had a blurred impression of rows of
fascinated faces pressed up against them.
Surendra and Gretchen stared at Quentin in white-faced
horror, their mouths open, as if what was happening were
his fault. Penny obviously had some theatrical notions about
how a fight should go, because he was bouncing on his feet
and doing little fake jabs and weaving his head around like
boxers in movies.
“What the fuck are you doing?” Quentin shouted at him,
more shocked than hurt.
Penny’s jaw was clenched, and his breath hissed in and
out between his teeth. There was saliva on his chin, and his
eyes looked weird—the phrase “fixed and dilated” flashed
through Quentin’s mind. Penny aimed a big roundhouse
punch at Quentin’s head, and Quentin flinched away
violently, ducking and covering his head with his arms. He
recovered enough to grab Penny around the waist while he
was still off balance.They staggered back and forth like a pair of drunken
waltzers, leaning on each other for support, then crashed
into a shrubbery at the edge of the terrace. It dropped its
payload of snow on them. Quentin was a couple of inches
taller than Penny, and his arms were longer, but Penny was
made of more solid stuff and could throw him around. A low
stone bench cut them off at the knees, and they both fell
over, Penny on top.
The back of Quentin’s head hit the stone terrace hard.
Lightning flashed. It hurt, but at the same time it had the
effect of sweeping away all of Quen tin’s fear, and most of
his conscious thoughts, like somebody sweeping the
dishes off a table with both arms. In their place it substituted
blind rage.
They rolled over each other, both trying to get in a punch
and grabbing at the other one’s arms so he couldn’t. There
was blood: Penny had cut his forehead open somehow.
Quentin wanted to get up so they could box. He wanted to
deck Penny, lay him out flat. He was vaguely aware of an
enraged Gretchen trying to hit Penny with her stick and
hitting him instead.
He was on top and just about had his fist free for a good
hard shot when he felt strong arms encircle his chest,
almost tenderly, and lift him back and up. With Quentin’s
weight off him Penny popped up on his toes like an electric
toy, breathing hard, red running down his face, but there
were people between them now, the crowd had enveloped
them, Quentin was being pulled backward. The spell was
broken. The fight was over.
The next hour was a jumble of unfamiliar rooms and people
leaning down to talk to him earnestly and dab at his face
with rough cloths. An older woman with an enormous
bosom whom he’d never seen before worked a spell with
cedar and thyme that made his face feel better. She putsomething cold that he couldn’t see on the back of his head
where it hit the terrace, whispering in an unfamiliar Asian
language. The throbbing faded some.
He still felt a little off—he wasn’t in pain, but it was like he
was wearing deep-sea diving gear, clumping in slow
motion through the hallways, heavy and weightless at the
same time, brushing past the curious fish that peered at
him and then quickly skittered away. The kids his age and
younger regarded his battered face with awe—his ear was
swollen, and he had a monster black eye. The older kids
found the whole thing funny. Quentin decided to roll with the
amusement. He did his best to project calm good humor.
For a moment Eliot’s face swam in front of him with a look
of sympathy that made Quentin’s eyes flood with hot tears
that he viciously suppressed. It turned out it had been Eliot
and those very same Physical Kids, speak of the devil, who
had broken up the fight. Those powerful, gentle arms that
pulled him off Penny belonged to Eliot’s friend Josh
Hoberman—the fat one.
He’d missed most of dinner, so he sat down as they
were serving dessert, which seemed consistent with the
backward quality of the whole day. They waived the rule
about late arrivals. He couldn’t shake the thickheaded
feeling—he watched the world through a long-range lens,
heard it through a tumbler pressed against a wall. He still
hadn’t figured out what the fight had been about. Why would
Penny hit him? Why would anybody do that? Why come to
somewhere like Brakebills just to screw it up by being an
asshole?
He figured he should probably eat something, but the first
bite of flour-less chocolate cake turned to sticky glue in his
mouth, and he had to sprint to make it to the bathroom
before he threw up. At which point a massive gravitational
field gripped him and pressed him roughly and irrevocably
down against the grimy bathroom floor, as if a giant had
slapped him down with his mighty hand and then, when he
was down far enough, leaned on him with all his weight,Quentin woke up in darkness. He was in bed, but not his
own bed. His head hurt.
Woke up might have been putting it too strongly. The
focus wasn’t sharp, and his brain wasn’t completely sure
that its integrity was uncompromised. Quentin knew
Brakebills had an infirmary, but he’d never been there
before. He didn’t even know where it was. He’d passed
through another secret portal, this time into the world of the
sick and injured.
A woman was fussing over him, a pretty woman. He
couldn’t see what she was doing, but he felt her cool, soft
fingertips moving over his skull.
He cleared his throat, tasted something bitter.
“You’re the paramedic. You were the paramedic.”
“Uh-huh,” she said. “Past tense is better, that was a one-
time performance. Though I won’t say I didn’t enjoy myself.”
“You were there. The day I came here.”
“I was there,” she agreed. “I wanted to make sure you
made it to the Examination.”
“What are you doing here?”
“I come here sometimes.”
“I’ve never seen you here.”
“I make a point of not being seen.”
A long pause followed, during which he might have slept.
But she was still there when he opened his eyes again.
“I like the hair,” he said.
She was no longer wearing her paramedic’s uniform,
and her dark hair was up, held in place with chopsticks,revealing more of her small, jewel-like face. She had
seemed so young before, and she didn’t look any different
now, but he wondered. She had the gravity of a much older
woman.
“Those braids were a bit much,” she said.
“That man who died—what really happened to him? Why
did he die?”
“No special reason.” A vertical line appeared between
her eyebrows. “He wasn’t supposed to, he just did. People
do.”
“I thought it might have something to do with my being
there.”
“Well, there’s nothing wrong with your sense of self-
importance. Turn over on your stomach.”
Quentin did, and she dabbed the back of his head with a
liquid that smelled sharply and stung.
“So it didn’t mean anything?”
“Death always means something. But no, nothing apart
from the usual. There, all done. You have to take care of
yourself, Quentin. We need you in fighting trim.”
He rolled onto his back again. His pillow had grown cool
while she worked. He closed his eyes. He knew that a more
alert Quentin would be working harder to zero in precisely
on who she was, and what part she was playing in his story,
or he in hers. But he couldn’t.
“That book you gave me,” he said. “I think I lost it. I didn’t
have a chance to read it.”
In his depleted, borderline demented state the loss of the
Fillory book suddenly seemed very sad, a tragedy beyond
all possibility of redemption. A warm tear rolled down his
cheek and into his ear.
“Hush,” she said. “It wasn’t time yet. You’ll find it again, if
you look hard enough. That much I can promise you.”It was the kind of thing people always said about Fillory.
She placed something cool on his burning forehead, and
he lost consciousness.
When he woke up again she was gone. But he wasn’t
alone.
“You had a concussion,” somebody said.
It might have been the voice that finally woke him up. It
had been calling his name. He recognized it, but he couldn’t
place it. It was calm and familiar in a way he found
comforting.
“Hey, Q. Q? Are you awake? Professor Moretti said you
had a concussion.”
It was Penny’s voice. He could even see the pale oval of
Penny’s face, propped up on pillows, across the aisle from
him and one bed down.
“That’s why you threw up. It must have been when we fell
over that bench. You hit your head on the ground.” All the
crazy anger had drained out of Penny. He was positively
chatty now.
“Yeah. I know I hit my head,” Quentin said slowly, thickly.
“It was my head.”
“It won’t affect your mental functioning, if you’re
wondering about that. That’s what Moretti said. I asked.”
“Well that’s a relief.”
A long silence passed. A clock ticked somewhere. There
was a lovely sequence in the last Fillory book, The
Wandering Dune, when little Jane, the youngest Chatwin,
catches a bad cold and spends a week in bed talking to the
Drawing Master on board the good ship Windswept,
attended to by soft, sympathetic bunnies. Quentin hadalways liked Jane. She was different from the other
Chatwins: more thoughtful, with an unpredictable sense of
humor and a sharper edge than her slightly saccharine,
Dick-and-Jane siblings.
He wondered what time it was.
“What about you?” he said numbly. He wasn’t so sure he
was willing to make nice just yet. “Did you get hurt?”
“I cut open my forehead on your tooth. And you broke my
nose when you head-butted me. They fixed it with a
Pulaski’s Mending. I’ve never seen it done like that before,
at least not on a human being. She used goat’s milk.”
“I didn’t even know I head-butted you.”
Penny was quiet again. Quentin counted thirty ticks of the
clock.
“Do you have a black eye?” Penny said. “I can’t see.”
“Huge one.”
“Thought so.”
There was a glass of water on the bedside table. Quentin
gulped it gratefully and fell back on the pillow. Hot veins of
pain flashed through his head. Whatever the paramedic
had done, or whoever she was, he still had some healing to
do.
“Penny. Why the hell did you hit me like that?”
“Well, I think I had to,” Penny said. He sounded a little
shocked that Quentin would even ask.
“You had to.” Maybe he wasn’t too tired after all. “But I
didn’t do anything.”
“You didn’t do anything. Oh, that’s right. You didn’t do
anything.” Penny chuckled woodenly. His voice was oddly
cool, as if he’d rehearsed this speech, his closing
argument, many times. Behind it Quentin could hear that
weird manic anger ramping back up. “You could havetalked to me, Quentin. You could have shown me a little
respect. You and your little girlfriend.”
Oh, God. Was this really how it was going to be?
“Penny, who are you even talking about? Are you talking
about Alice?”
“Oh, come on, Quentin. You sit there, you give each other
little looks, you laugh at me. Openly. Would you believe I
actually thought it was going to be fun? That we were all
going to work together? Would you believe I actually
thought that?”
Quentin recognized Penny’s aggrieved tone. Once his
parents had rented out the parlor floor of their brownstone
to an apparently sane little man, an actuary, who had left
them increasingly high-handed notes requesting that they
stop videotaping him every time he took out the trash.
“Don’t be an ass,” Quentin said. He didn’t see this as a
rise-above-it situation. What, was Penny going to come
over and give him another concussion? “Do you even know
what you look like to the rest of the world? You sit there with
your big-ass punk attitude, and you expect people to come
around begging to hang out with you?”
Penny was sitting up now.
“That night,” he said, “when you and Alice went off
together. You didn’t apologize, you didn’t ask me, didn’t say
goodbye, you just walked right out. And then, and then, ” he
finished triumphantly, “you passed? And I failed? How is
that fair? How is that fair? What did you expect me to do?”
So that was it. “That’s right, Penny,” Quentin said. “You
definitely should have hit me in the face because you didn’t
pass a test. Why don’t you go hit Professor Van der
Weghe, too?”
“I don’t take things lying down, Quentin.” Penny’s voice
was very loud in the empty infirmary. “I don’t want trouble.
But if you come after me, I swear to you that I will get rightback in your face. That’s just how it works. You think this is
your own private fantasy world? You think you can do
whatever you want? You try to walk all over me, Quentin. I’m
going to come right back at you!”
They were both talking so loudly that Quentin didn’t even
notice when the infirmary door opened and Dean Fogg
came in, dressed in an exquisitely embroidered silk
kimono and a Dickensian nightcap. For a second Quentin
thought he was holding a candle before he realized it was
Fogg’s upraised index finger that was softly glowing.
“That’s enough,” he said quietly.
“Dean Fogg—” Penny began as if here, finally, was a
voice of reason he could appeal to.
“I said that’s enough.” Quentin had never heard the Dean
raise his voice, and he didn’t now. Fogg was always a
faintly ridiculous figure in the daytime, but now, at night,
wreathed in his kimono, in the alien confines of the
infirmary, he looked powerful and otherworldly. Wizardly.
“You’re not going to speak again except to answer my
questions. Is that clear?”
Did that count as a question? To be safe Quentin just
nodded. His head hurt worse now.
“Yes sir,” Penny said promptly.
“I have heard absolutely enough about this. Who
instigated this appalling incident?”
“I did,” Penny said instantly. “Sir. Quentin didn’t do
anything, he had nothing to do with it.”
Quentin said nothing. That was the funny thing about
Penny. He was insane, but he did have his insane
principles, and he stuck to them.
“And yet,” Fogg said, “somehow your nose found its way
into the path of Quentin’s forehead. Will it happen again?”
“No, sir.”“No.”
“All right.” Quentin heard springs chirp as the Dean sat
down on an empty bed. He didn’t turn his head. “There is
only one thing that pleases me about this afternoon’s
altercation, which is that neither of you resorted to magic to
hurt each other. Neither of you is advanced enough in your
studies to understand this properly, but in time you will learn
that wielding magic means working with enormously
powerful energies. And controlling those energies requires
a calm and dispassionate mind.
“Use magic in anger, and you will harm yourself much
more quickly than you will harm your adversary. There are
certain spells . . . if you lose control of them, they will
change you. Consume you. Transform you into something
not human, a niffin, a spirit of raw, uncontrolled magical
energy.”
Fogg regarded them both with stern composure. Very
dramatic. Quen tin looked up at the infirmary’s pressed-tin
ceiling stubbornly. His consciousness was guttering and
fading. Where was the part where he told Penny to stop
being a dick?
“Listen to me carefully,” Fogg was saying. “Most people
are blind to magic. They move through a blank and empty
world. They’re bored with their lives, and there’s nothing
they can do about it. They’re eaten alive by longing, and
they’re dead before they die.
“But you live in the magical world, and it’s a great gift.
And if you want to get killed here, you’ll find plenty of
opportunities without killing each other.”
He stood up to go.
“Will we be punished, sir?” Penny asked.
Punished? He must honestly believe they were still in
high school. The Dean paused at the door. The light from
his finger was almost extinguished.“Yes, Penny, as a matter of fact you will be. Six weeks of
washing dishes, lunch and dinner. If this or anything like it
happens again, you’re expelled. Quentin—” he stopped to
consider. “Just learn to handle yourself better. I don’t want
any more problems.”
The door closed behind him. Quentin exhaled. He closed
his eyes, and the room drifted silently off its moorings and
out to sea. He wondered, with no special interest either
way, whether Penny was in love with Alice.
“Wow,” Penny said, apparently unfazed by the prospect
of spending the next month and a half with pruny fingertips.
He sounded like a little kid. “I mean, wow . Did you hear what
he said? About magic consuming you? I didn’t know any of
that. Did you know any of that stuff ?”
“Penny,” Quentin said. “One, your hair is stupid. And two,
I don’t know what it’s like where you come from, but if you
ever do anything that could get me sent back to Brooklyn
again, I won’t just break your nose. I will motherfucking kill
you.”THE PHYSICAL KIDS
Six months later, in September, Quentin and Alice spent
the first day of their Third Year at Brakebills sitting outside a
small square Victorian outbuilding about a half mile from
the House. It was a piece of pure folly architecture, a
miniature house, white with a gray roof, complete with
windows and gables, that might at one time have been
servants’ quarters, or a guest cottage, or a largish garden
shed.
There was a weathervane on top, wrought iron and
shaped like a pig, that always pointed somewhere other
than where the wind was blowing. Quentin couldn’t make
out anything through the windows, but he thought he heard
snatches of conversation coming from inside. The cottage
stood on the edge of a wide hayfield.
It was midafternoon. The sky was blue and the early
autumn sun was high. The air was silent and still. A rusted-
out old piece of farm machinery stood half drowned in the
same long grass it used to mow.
“This is bullshit. Knock again.”
“You knock,” Alice said. She released a convulsive
sneeze. “I’ve been knocking for twenty . . . for twenty . . .”
She sneezed again. She was allergic to pollen.
“Bless you.”
“Twenty minutes. Thank you.” She blew her nose.
“They’re in there, they just won’t open the door.”
“What do you think we should do?”
Quentin thought for a minute.
“I don’t know,” he said. “Maybe it’s a test.”Back in June, after finals, all twenty members of the Second
Year had been marched through the Practical Applications
room one at a time to be assigned their Disciplines. The
sessions were scheduled at two-hour intervals, though
sometimes it took longer; the entire process lasted three
days. It was a circus atmosphere. Most of the students, and
probably the faculty, were ambivalent about the whole idea
of Disciplines. They were socially divisive, the theory
behind them was weak, and everybody ended up studying
pretty much the same curriculum anyway, so what was the
point? But it was traditional for every student to have one,
so a Discipline every student would have. Alice called it her
magic bat mitzvah.
The P.A. lab was transformed for the occasion. All the
cabinets were open, and every inch of the counters and
tabletops was crammed with old instruments made of wood
and silver and etched brass and worked glass. There were
calipers and bulbs and beakers and clockwork and scales
and magnifying glasses and dusty glass bulbs full of
wobbling mercury and other less easily identifiable
substances. Brakebills was largely dependent on Victorian-
era technology. It wasn’t an affectation, or not entirely;
electronics, Quentin was told, behaved unpredictably in the
presence of sorcery.
Professor Sunderland presided over the circus. Quentin
had avoided her as much as possible since that horrible,
dreamlike period when she tutored him during his first
semester. His crush on her had faded to a faint but still
pathetic echo of its former self, to the point where he could
almost look at her and not want to fill his hands with her
hair.
“I’ll be with you in just one minute!” she said brightly,
busily repack ing a set of very fine, sharp-looking silver
instruments in a velvet carrying case.
“So.” She snapped the case shut and latched it.
“Everybody at Brakebills has an aptitude for magic, but
there are individual variations—people tend to have anaffinity for some specific strain.” She delivered this speech
by rote, like a stewardess demonstrating in-flight safety
procedures. “It’s a very personal thing. It has to do with
where you were born, and where the moon was, and what
the weather was like, and what kind of person you are, plus
all kinds of technical stuff that’s not worth getting into. There
are two hundred or so other factors which Professor March
would be happy to list for you. It’s one of his specialties. In
fact I think Disciplines are his Discipline.”
“What’s your Discipline?”
“It’s related to metallurgy. Any other personal questions?”
“Yes. Why do we have to go through all this testing?
Can’t you just figure my Discipline out from my birthday and
all that stuff you just mentioned?”
“You could. In theory. In practice it would just be a pain in
the ass.” She smiled and put her blond hair up and secured
it with a clip, and a sharp shard of his old yen for her
pierced Quentin’s heart. “It’s much easier to go at it
inductively, from the outside in, till we get a hit.”
She placed a bronze scarab in each of his hands and
asked him to recite the alphabet, first in Greek, then in
Hebrew, which he had to be prompted on, while she
studied him through what looked like a many-crooked
collapsible telescope. He could feel the metal beetles
crackling and buzzing with old spells. He had a horrible fear
that their little legs would suddenly start wriggling.
Occasionally she would stop and have him repeat a letter
while she adjusted the instrument by means of protruding
screws.
“Mm,” she said. “Uh-huh.”
She produced a tiny bonsai fir tree and made him stare
at it from different angles while it ruffled its tiny needles in
response to a wind that wasn’t there. Afterward she took
the tree aside and conferred with it privately.
“Well, you’re not an herbalist!” she said.Over the next hour she tested him in two dozen different
ways, only a few of which he understood the point of. He ran
through basic First Year spells while she watched and
measured their effectiveness with a battery of instruments.
She had him read an incantation while standing next to a
large brass clock with seven hands, one of which circled its
face backward and with disconcerting speed. She sighed
heavily. Several times she took down sagging, overweight
volumes from high shelves and consulted them for long,
uncomfortable intervals.
“You’re an interesting case,” she said.
There is really no end to life’s little humiliations, Quentin
reflected.
He sorted pearl buttons of various sizes and colors into
different piles while she studied his reflection in a silver
mirror. She tried to get him to take a nap so she could pry
into his dreams, but he couldn’t fall asleep, so she put him
under with one sip of a minty, effervescent potion.
Apparently his dreams didn’t tell her anything she didn’t
already know. She stared at him for a long minute with her
hands on her hips.
“Let’s try an experiment,” she said finally, with forced
liveliness. She smiled thinly and tucked a stray strand of
hair back behind her ear.
Professor Sunderland walked down the length of the
room closing the dusty wooden shutters with a clatter until it
was dark. Then she cleared the clutter off a gray slate
tabletop and boosted herself up onto it. She yanked her
skirt down over her knees and motioned for him to sit
facing her on the table opposite.
“Go like this,” she said, holding up her hands as if she
were about to conduct an invisible orchestra. Unladylike
half-moons of sweat bloomed under the arms of her blouse.
He went like this.
She led him through a series of gestures familiar to himfrom Popper, though he’d never seen them put together in
quite that combination. She whispered some words he
didn’t catch.
“Now go like this.” She flung her hands up over her head.
When she did it, nothing happened. But when Quentin
mirrored her, streams of fat white sparks streamed out of
his fingertips. It was amazing—it was like they’d been
inside him all his life, just waiting for him to wave his hands
the right way. They splashed happily out across the ceiling
in the dimness and came floating festively down around
him, bouncing a few times when they hit the floor and then
finally winking out. His hands felt warm and tingly.
The relief was almost unbearable. He did it again and a
few more sparks flew out, weaker this time. He watched
them trail down around him. The third time he got only one.
“What does it mean?” he asked.
“I have no idea,” Professor Sunderland said. “I’ll put you
down as Undetermined. We’ll try again next year.”
“Next year?” Quentin watched with a rising sense of
disappointment as she jumped down off the table and
started reopening shutters, window by window. He winced
at the sunlight flooding in. “What do you mean? What am I
going to do till then?”
“Wait,” she said. “It happens. People put too much
importance on these things. Be a darling and send in the
next student, would you? We’re already running late, and
it’s only noon.”
The summer dragged by in slow motion. It was really the
fall, of course, in the world outside Brakebills, and the
Brooklyn Quentin came home to for summer vacation was
chilly and gray, the streets plastered with wet brown leaves
and mashed ginkgo balls that smelled like vomit.He haunted his old house like a ghost—it took a special
effort to make himself visible to his parents, who always
looked vaguely surprised when their phantom son
requested their attention. James and Julia were away at
college, so Quentin took long walks. He visited the
branching, angular Gowanus Canal, its water the green of
pooled radiator fluid. He shot baskets on deserted courts
with missing nets and rainwater puddles in the corners. The
autumn cold gave the ball a dead, inert feel. His world
wasn’t here, it was elsewhere. He traded desultory e-mails
with friends from Brakebills—Alice, Eliot, Surendra,
Gretchen—and flipped indifferently through his summer
reading, an eighteenth-century History of Magic that
appeared quite slim from the outside but turned out to
contain, by some subtle bibliographical magic, no fewer
than 1,832 pages.
In November he received a cream-colored envelope,
which turned up tucked by invisible hands into History of
Magic. It contained a stiff letter-pressed card with an
elegant engraving of the Brakebills crest, inviting him to
return to school at six in the evening by way of a narrow,
never-used alleyway next to the First Lutheran Church ten
blocks from his house.
He dutifully presented himself at the correct address at
the appointed time. This late in the fall the sun set at four
thirty in the afternoon, but it was unseasonably mild out,
almost warm. Standing there at the entrance to the
passageway, looking around for stray vergers who might
charge him with trespassing—or worse, offer him spiritual
guidance—cars whooshing by in the street behind him, he
had never felt so absolutely sure that he was delusional,
that Brooklyn was the only reality there was, and that
everything which had happened to him last year was just a
fanboy hallucination, proof that the boredom of the real
world had finally driven him totally and irreversibly out of his
mind. The alley was so skinny he practically had to turn
sideways to walk down it, his two overstuffed Brakebills
duffel bags—they were midnight blue with dark brown trim,school colors—scraping against the sweating stone walls
on either side. He was overwhelmingly certain that in thirty
seconds he would be standing at the blank wall at the end
of the alley.
But then an impossible breath of warm, sweet, late-
summer air came wafting toward him from the far end of the
alleyway, accompanied by the chirping of crickets, and he
could see the green expanse of the Sea. As heavy as his
bags were he ran toward it.
Now it was the first day of the semester, and Quentin and
Alice were stranded in a baking hot meadow outside a
precious white Victorian bungalow. The bungalow was
where the students who did Physical Magic met on
Tuesday afternoons for their weekly seminar.
When she was tested, Alice displayed a highly technical
Discipline involving light manipulation—phosphoromancy,
she said it was called—that placed her in Physical Magic.
Quentin was there because Physical was the group that
had both the fewest total members and the fewest incoming
members, so that seemed like the best place to stash him
until he had a Discipline of his own. The first seminar had
been scheduled for 12:30, and Quentin and Alice had even
gotten there early, but now it was almost five, and they’d
been out there all afternoon. They were hot and tired and
thirsty and annoyed, but neither of them wanted to give up
and go back up to the House. If they were going to be
Physical Kids, apparently they would have to prove it by
getting in the front door.
They sat under a massive spreading beech tree that
stood nearby, coolly indifferent to their plight. They leaned
back against the trunk with a fat hard gray root between
them.
“So what do you want to do,” Quentin said dully. Tiny“I don’t know.” Alice sneezed again. “What do you want to
do?”
Quentin plucked at the grass. A burst of faint laughter
came from inside the house. If there was a password they
hadn’t found it. He and Alice had spent an hour looking for
hidden writing—they scanned the door in every spectrum
they could think of, visible and invisible, infrared to gamma,
and tried to strip the paint off to look underneath, but it
wouldn’t come. Alice even tried some advanced
graphological enchantments on the squiggly grain of the
wood itself, but it just stared back at them blankly. They’d
sent currents of force twisting into the lock, jiggling the
tumblers, but they couldn’t pick it. They looked for a fourth-
dimensional path around the door. They’d jointly plucked up
their nerve and summoned a kind of phantasmal axe—it
wasn’t explicitly against any rule they could think of—but
they couldn’t even scratch it. For a while Alice was
convinced the door was an illusion, that it didn’t even exist,
but it certainly looked and felt real, and neither of them
could find any charms or enchantments to dispel.
“Look at it,” Quentin said. “It’s like some lame Hansel and
Gretel hut. I thought the Physical Kids were supposed to be
cool.”
“Dinner’s in an hour,” Alice said.
“I’ll skip it.”
“It’s lamb tonight, with a rosemary crust. Potatoes au
dauphin .” Alice’s eidetic memory retained odd details.
“Maybe we should have our own seminar. Out here.”
She snorted. “Yeah, that’d show ’em.”
The beech tree was on the edge of a field that had just
been mown. The giant cinnamon rolls of hay dotting the
field cast long shadows.
“You’re a what again? A photomancer?”“Phosphoromancer.”
“What can you do?”
“I’m not sure yet. I practiced some things over the
summer. Focusing light, refracting it, bending it. If you bend
light around something, it turns invisible. But I want to
understand the theory of it first.”
“Show me something.”
Alice turned shy. It didn’t take much.
“I can hardly do anything.”
“Look, I don’t even have a Discipline. I’m a
nothingmancer. I’m a squatmancer.”
“They just don’t know what it is yet. You have your little
sparky thing.”
“Same difference. And don’t make fun of my sparky
thing. Now bend me some damn light.”
She grimaced, but she got up on her knees on the grass
and held up her hand, fingers spread. They were kneeling
face-to-face, and he was suddenly aware of her full breasts
inside her thin, high-necked blouse.
“Watch the shadow,” she snapped.
She did something with her fingers, and the shadow of
her hand disappeared. It was simply gone, leaving behind
only a few ghostly rainbow highlights.
“Nice.”
“It’s pathetic, I know.” She waved her hand, scrubbing out
the magic. “My whole hand is supposed to go invisible, but I
can only do the shadow.”
There was something here. Quentin felt his sulk starting
to dispel. This was a test. Physical magic. They weren’t
Morris dancing with tree spirits here. This was a brute-force
problem.“What about the other way?” he said slowly. “Could you
focus light instead, like a magnifying glass?”
She didn’t answer right away, but he could see her
nimble mind take hold of the problem and start turning it
over.
“Maybe if I . . . hm. I think there’s something in Culhwch
and Owen. You’d need to stabilize the effect, though. And
localize it.”
She made a circle with her thumb and forefinger and
spoke five long words over it. Quentin could see light
bending inside the circle, warping and distorting the leaves
and grass visible through it. Then it sharpened and focused
to a white dot that burned an afterimage into his retina, and
he looked away. She tilted it, and the ground under her
hand smoked.
“I will kill you if you get me kicked out of Brakebills. Do you
understand me? I’m not joking. I know how to do it. I will
literally make you die.”
“That’s funny, that’s exactly what I told Penny after he hit
me,” Quentin said.
“Except I’ll really do it.”
They had decided to burn their way through the door. If it
was a test, Quentin reasoned, it didn’t matter much how
they solved it as long as they solved it. They hadn’t been
given any rules, so they couldn’t be breaking any. And if
they did burn down the damn house, with Eliot and his
smug little friends inside it, serve them right.
They had to work fast, because the sunlight was fading.
The sun had already gone dull and coppery, and in another
few minutes its lower rim would touch the tops of the trees
on the far side of the hayfield. The barest early-fall chill was
in the air. Yellow lights were already on inside the house.Quentin heard—did he imagine it?—the pop of a cork
being withdrawn from a bottle.
Holding both arms above her head and curved slightly
upward, like she was balancing a large invisible basket on
her head, Alice had created the magical equivalent of a
magnifying glass a dozen yards across—her bent arms
defined a small section of the total circumference of a
soaring circular lens, the upper edge of which was even
with the top of the beech tree, taller than the chimney of the
little Victorian bungalow. Quentin could just make out the
edge of the lens as a curved distortion in the air. The focal
point was too bright to look at.
Alice stood about fifty feet back from the door. Quentin
stood closer, to one side, holding out a hand to shield his
eyes and shouting out directions:
“Up! Okay, slow! A little more! Keep moving! Okay, now
right!”
Quentin could feel the heat from the focused sunlight
against his face and smell the savory-sweet smell of wood
smoke, along with an acrid tang of seared house paint. The
door was definitely vulnerable to heat. They’d been worried
that there wouldn’t be enough sunlight left, but Alice’s spell
was cutting a nice deep charred trench in the wood. They’d
decided to cut the door in half laterally, and if the trench
wasn’t penetrating all the way through, it must be pretty
close. A bigger problem was Alice’s aim, which wasn’t
good, and in one place she had wandered off the door and
burned a groove in the wall.
“I feel stupid!” Alice shouted. “How are we doing?”
“Looking good!”
“My back hurts! Are we almost done?”
“Almost!” he lied.
With a foot to go Alice expanded the spell’s radius to
compensate for the fading sun. She was whispering, but hewasn’t sure if it was an incantation or just obscenities.
Quentin realized they were being observed: one of the
older professors, a very erect, white-haired man named
Brzezinski, who specialized in potions and whose pants
were always covered with appalling stains, had interrupted
his evening stroll to watch them. In another lifetime he had
given Quentin the test involving knots during his
Examination. He wore sweater-vests and smoked a pipe
and looked like an IBM engineer, circa 1950.
Shit, Quentin thought. They were about to get busted.
But Professor Brzezinski just took his pipe out of his
mouth. “Carry on,” he said gruffly. He turned and walked
back in the direction of the House.
It took only about ten minutes for Alice to make a full
lateral cut, then go back across it a second time. The trench
glowed red.
When she was finished, Quentin walked back to where
she was standing.
“You have ash on your face,” she said. She brushed at
his forehead with her fingers.
“Maybe we should go across again. You know, just to be
sure.” If this didn’t work, he was out of ideas, and he didn’t
think he could spend the night out here. He also didn’t think
he could face going back to the House in defeat.
“There’s not enough light.” She looked drained. “By the
end the lens was probably out to a quarter mile. After that it
just loses coherence. Falls apart at the edges.”
A quarter mile? Quentin thought. How powerful is she?
His stomach rumbled. It was fully dusk now, and the sky
was a luminous blue. They stared at the scarred, blackened
door. It looked worse than he thought—Alice’s aim had
strayed on the second pass, so in places there were two
separate trenches. If this was wrong, Eliot was going to kill
him.“Should I try to kick it in?”
Alice pulled her mouth to one side. “What if there’s
somebody behind it?”
“So what do you suggest?”
“I don’t know.” She picked at one of the burnt parts that
had cooled. “I think we’re almost through . . .”
There was an old iron knocker on the door in the shape
of a disembodied hand holding an iron ball. It was bolted
on.
“Okay,” Quentin said. “Stand back.”
God, please let this work. He got a good grip on the iron
hand, put one foot on the door, uttered a long falsetto
martial arts yell, and threw his weight backward. The top
half of the door swung open with no resistance whatsoever
—it must have been hanging on by a few flakes of ash. He
fell down backward on the path.
A girl Quentin recognized as one of the Fourth Years
stood in the doorway with warm light streaming out into the
twilight around her, holding a glass of dark red wine in one
hand. She looked down at him coolly. Alice was leaning
against the side of the house laughing so hard that no
sound was coming out.
“Dinner’s almost ready,” the girl said. “Eliot made an
amatriciana sauce. We couldn’t get any guanciale, but I
think bacon works fine. Don’t you?”
In spite of the heat a fire popped and flickered in the
fireplace.
“Six hours, twelve minutes,” said a fat young man with
wavy hair sitting in a leather club chair. “That’s actually
about par.”“Tell them how long it took you, Josh,” said the girl who’d
met them at the door. Quentin thought her name was Janet.
“Twenty hours, thirty-one minutes. Longest night of my
life. Not a record, but pretty close.”
“We thought he was trying to starve us out.” Janet poured
out the rest of a bottle of red wine into two glasses standing
on a sideboard and handed them to Quentin and Alice.
Two more empty bottles stood on the floor, though the
others didn’t seem especially drunk.
They were in a shabby but comfortable library lined with
threadbare rugs and lit by candles and firelight. Quentin
realized that the little house must be larger on the inside
than it was on the outside; it was also a lot cooler—the
atmosphere was that of a nice, chilly fall evening. Books
overflowed the bookcases and stood in wobbly stacks in
the corners and even on the mantelpiece. The furniture was
distinguished but mismatched, and in places it was
severely battered. In between the bookcases the walls were
hung with the usual inexplicable artifacts that accumulate in
private clubs: African masks, dreary landscape paintings,
retired ceremonial daggers, glass cases full of maps and
medals and the deteriorating corpses of exotic moths that
had presumably been captured at great effort and expense.
Quentin felt overheated and underdressed but mostly just
relieved to finally be inside.
There were only five of them, counting himself and Alice.
Eliot was there, scanning one of the bookshelves and
acting like he hadn’t noticed them yet. He seemed to be
trying to make a serious argument about magical theory to
somebody, but nobody was listening
“Tinkerbell, we have guests,” Janet said. “Please turn
around and face the room.” She was lean and animated,
with a serious, somewhat anachronistic pageboy haircut.
She was the loud one: Quentin had seen her holding forth to
the others on walks through the Maze and making
speeches over dinner in the dining room.Eliot broke off his monologue and turned around. He was
wearing an apron.
“Hello,” he said, not missing a beat. “Glad you could
make it. Alice, I understand you burned our door in half.”
“Quentin helped.”
“We watched you out the window,” Josh said. “You’re
hella lucky Brzezinski didn’t catch you with that axe.”
“What’s the correct solution?” Alice asked. “I mean, I
know it worked, but there must be a better way.”
She took a timid sip of her wine, immediately followed by
a less timid one.
“There isn’t one,” Janet said. “Or not a good one,
anyway. That’s part of the point. This is Physical Magic. It’s
messy. It’s crude. As long as you don’t knock the building
down, it counts. And if you did it would probably still count.”
“How did you do it?” Alice asked shyly. “I mean, when it
was your turn?”
“Froze and shattered it. I do a special kind of cold magic,
that’s my Discipline. Sixty-three minutes. And that is a
record.”
“It used to be you could say ‘friend’ in Elvish and it would
let you in,” Josh said. “Now too many people have read
Tolkien.”
“Eliot, darling, I think our dinner must be ready,” Janet
said. Her attitude toward Eliot was hard to read, a weird
combination of tenderness and contempt. She clapped her
hands. “Josh, maybe you could do something about . . . ?”
She gestured in the direction of the half-demolished door.
“The mosquitoes are getting in.”
Still dazed, Quentin trailed Eliot into the kitchen, which
was, again, larger and nicer than really seemed plausible
from the outside, with white cabinets up to the high ceiling
and soapstone counters and an aerodynamic-looking1950s refrigerator. Eliot sloshed some wine from his glass
into a pan of red sauce on the stove.
“Never cook with a wine you wouldn’t drink,” he said.
“Though I guess that presupposes that there is a wine I
wouldn’t drink.”
He didn’t seem at all embarrassed by the fact that he’d
ignored Quentin for the past year. It was like it never
happened.
“So you have this whole place to yourself?” Quentin didn’t
want to let on how much he wanted to belong here, even
now that he did, officially, belong here.
“Pretty much. So do you, now.”
“Do all the Disciplines have their own clubhouses?”
“It’s not a clubhouse,” Eliot said sharply. He dumped a
huge clump of fresh pasta into a tall pot of boiling water and
stirred it to break it up. “This’ll cook in about a minute flat.”
“Then what is it?”
“Well, all right, it is a clubhouse. But don’t call it that. We
call it the Cottage. We have the seminars here, and the
library isn’t bad. Sometimes Janet paints in the bedroom
upstairs. Only we can get in here, you know.”
“What about Fogg?”
“Oh, and Fogg, though he never bothers. And Bigby. You
know Bigby, right?”
Quentin shook his head.
“I can’t believe you don’t know Bigby!” Eliot said,
chuckling. “God, you’re going to love Bigby.”
He tasted the sauce, then glugged in a slug of heavy
cream and stirred it in in widening circles. The sauce paled
and thickened. Eliot had a jaunty, offhanded confidence at
the stove.
“All the groups have a place like this. The Naturals havethis deeply lame treehouse off in the forest. The Illusionists
have a house just like this one, though only they know where
it is. You have to find it to get in. Knowledge just has the
library, the poor suckers. And Healing has the clinic—”
“Eliot!” Janet’s voice came from the other room. “We’re
starving.” Quentin wondered how Alice was faring out there.
“All right, all right! I hope you don’t mind pasta,” he
added, to Quentin. “It’s all I made. There’s bruschetta out
there, or there was. At least there’s lots of wine.” He
drained the pasta in the sink, sending up a huge gout of
steam, and dumped it into the pan to finish in the sauce.
“God, I love cooking. I think if I weren’t a magician, I’d be a
chef. It’s just such a relief after all that invisible, intangible
bullshit, don’t you think?
“Richard was the real cook around here. I don’t know if
you knew him, he graduated last year. Tall. Total grind,
made us all look bad in front of Bigby, but at least he could
cook. Grab those two bottles there, would you? And the
corkscrew?”
With a white tablecloth and two heavy silver candelabras
and a wildly eclectic assortment of silverware, some of
which bordered on light hand-to-hand weaponry, the table
in the library almost looked like somewhere you could eat.
The food was simple but not at all bad. He’d forgotten he
was starving. Janet performed a trick—Quentin wasn’t sure
whether it was magical or just mechanical—to shorten the
long seminar table into a dinner table.
Janet, Josh, and Eliot gossiped about classes and
teachers and who was sleeping with whom and who
wanted to sleep with whom. They speculated endlessly
about other students’ relative strengths as spellcasters.
They maneuvered around one another with the absolute
confidence of people who had spent huge amounts of time
together, who trusted and loved one another and who knew
how to show one another off to best advantage and how to
curb each other’s boring and annoying habits. Quentin let
the chatter wash over him. Eating a sophisticated meal,alone in their own private dining room, felt very adult. This
was it, he thought. He had been an outsider before, but now
he had really entered into the inner life of the school. This
was the real Brakebills. He was in the warm secret heart of
the secret world.
They were arguing about what they would do after they
graduated.
“I imagine I’ll retreat to some lonely mountaintop,” Eliot
said airily. “Become a hermit for a while. I’ll grow a long
beard and people will come to me for advice, like in
cartoons.”
“Advice about what?” Josh snorted. “About whether a
dark suit counts as black tie?”
“And I’d like to see you try to grow a beard,” Janet
added. “God, you’re self-centered. Don’t you want to help
people?”
Eliot looked puzzled. “People? What people?”
“Poor people! Hungry people! Sick people! People who
can’t do magic!”
“What have people ever done for me? People don’t want
my help. People called me a faggot and threw me in a
Dumpster at recess when I was in fifth grade because my
pants were pressed.”
“Well, I hope for your sake there’s a wine cellar on your
mountaintop,” Janet said, annoyed. “Or a full bar. You won’t
last eight hours without a drink.”
“I will brew a crude but potent beverage from local herbs
and berries.”
“Or dry cleaning.”
“Well, that is a problem. You can use magic, but it’s never
the same. Maybe I’ll just live at the Plaza, like Eloise.”
“I’m bored!” Josh bellowed. “Let’s do Harper’s Fire-
Shaping.”He went over to a large cabinet full of dozens of tiny
drawers, narrow but deep, that turned out to be a kind of
miniature twig library. Each drawer bore a tiny handwritten
label, starting with Ailanthus in the upper left-hand corner
and ending with Zelkova, Japanese, in the lower right.
Harper’s Fire-Shaping was a useless but extremely
entertaining spell for stretching and leading a flame into
elaborate calligraphic shapes that flared for a moment in
midair and then disappeared. You did it with an aspen twig.
The evening devolved into attempts to shape the candle
flames into increasingly elaborate or obscene words and
shapes, which in turn led, inevitably, to the curtains catching
on fire (apparently not for the first time) and having to be
extinguished.
A halt was called. Eliot produced a slender, dangerous-
looking bottle of grappa. Only two of the candles had
survived the fire-shaping, but nobody bothered to replace
the others. It was late, after one in the morning. They sat
there in the half darkness in contented silence. Janet lay on
her back on the carpet staring up at the ceiling, her feet
propped up on Eliot’s lap. There was a funny physical
intimacy between the two of them, especially considering
what Quentin knew about Eliot’s sexual appetites.
“So this is it? We’re full-fledged Physical Kids now?” The
grappa was like a fiery seed that had drifted into Quentin’s
chest and taken root there. The seed gave birth to a hot,
glowing sapling, which grew and spread and unfolded into
a big warm leafy tree of good feeling. “Don’t we have to be
hazed or branded or, I don’t know, shaved or something?”
“Not unless you want to be,” Josh said.
“Somehow I thought there would be more of you,” Quentin
said. “Of us.”
“This is it,” Eliot said. “Since Richard and Isabel
graduated. There aren’t any Fifth Years. Nobody placed in.
If we didn’t get anybody this year, Fogg was talking about
merging us with Natural.”Josh shuddered theatrically.
“What were they like?” Alice asked. “Richard and
Isabel?”
“Like fire and ice,” Josh said. “Like chocolate and
marzipan.”
“It’s different without them,” Eliot said.
“Good riddance,” said Janet.
“Oh, they weren’t so bad,” Josh said. “You remember
when Richard thought he could bring the weathervane to
life? He was going to make it move around by itself. He
must have been up there for three days rubbing it with fish
oil and I don’t even want to think about what else.”
“That was unintentionally funny,” Janet said. “Doesn’t
count.”
“You just never got the point of Richard.”
Janet snorted.
“I got plenty of Richard,” she said, with surprising
bitterness.
A tiny hush fell. It was the first false note of the evening.
“But now we have a quorum again,” Eliot said quickly, “an
eminently respectable quorum. Physical Magic always gets
the best ones.”
“To the best ones,” Josh said.
Quentin raised his glass. He was up in the lofty branches
of his fiery tree, swaying in the warm alcoholic breeze.
“The best ones.”
They all drank.THE BEAST
The entire time he’d been at Brakebills, through First Year,
the exams, the whole disaster with Penny, right up until the
night he joined the Physical Kids, Quentin had been holding
his breath without knowing it. He realized only now that he’d
been waiting for Brakebills to vanish around him like a
daydream. Even aside from the many and varied laws of
thermodynamics that were violated there on a regular
basis, it was just too good to be true. It was like Fillory that
way. Fillory never lasted forever. Ember and Umber
promptly kicked the Chatwins out at the end of every book.
Deep down Quentin felt like a tourist who at the end of the
day would be herded back onto some dirty, lumbering,
snorting tour bus—with ripped vinyl seats and overhead
TVs and a stinking toilet—and shipped home, clutching a
tacky souvenir postcard and watching as the towers and
hedges and peaks and gables of Brakebills dwindled in the
rearview mirror.
But it hadn’t happened. And now he understood, he really
got, that it wasn’t going to happen. He’d wasted so much
time thinking, It’s all a dream, and It should have been
somebody else, and Nothing lasts forever. It was time he
started acting like who he was: a nineteen-year-old student
at a secret college for real, actual magic.
Now that he was in among them he had some leisure to
observe the Physical Kids up close. When he first met Eliot,
Quentin assumed that everyone at Brakebills would be like
him, but in fact that wasn’t the case at all. For one thing,
even in this rarefied setting Eliot’s bizarre personal manner
set him apart. For another, he was conspicuously brilliant in
class—maybe not quite as quick as Alice, but Alice worked
her ass off and Eliot didn’t even try, or if he did he hid it
very, very well. As far as Quentin could tell he never studied
at all. The only thing in the world that he would actually cop
to caring about was his appearance, especially his
expensive shirts, which he wore with cuff links, even thoughit cost him regular menial punishments for violating the
dress code.
Josh always wore the standard school uniform but
managed to make it look like he didn’t—his jacket never
quite fit his wide, round build, it was always twisted or
rumpled or too narrow in the shoulders. His whole
personality was like an elaborate joke that he never
stopped telling. It took Quentin a while to figure out that
Josh expected people not to take him seriously, and he
enjoyed—not always kindly—the moment when they
realized, too late, that they’d underestimated him. Because
he wasn’t as self-absorbed as Eliot or Janet he was the
group’s sharpest observer, and he missed very little of what
went on around him. He told Quentin that he’d been waiting
for Penny to snap for weeks:
“Are you kidding? That guy was a mystery wrapped in an
enigma and crudely stapled to a ticking fucking time bomb.
He was either going to hit somebody or start a blog. To tell
you the truth I’m kind of glad he hit you.”
Unlike the other Physical Kids Josh was an
undistinguished student, but once he’d mastered a skill he
was an exceptionally forceful spellcaster. It was a full six
weeks into his first year at Brakebills before he was able to
move his marble by magic, but when he finally did—as Eliot
told the story—it shot through a classroom window and
buried itself six inches in the trunk of a maple tree outside,
where it probably still was.
Janet’s parents were lawyers, of the high-flying
Hollywood-consorting variety, and colossally wealthy. She
grew up in L.A. being babysat by various celebrities, whom
under duress—but not very much duress—she would name.
Quentin supposed that accounted for the vivid, actressy
edge to her manner. She was the most visible of the
Physical Kids, loud and brusque and always proposing
toasts at dinner. She had terrible taste in men—the best
that could be said of her endless series of boyfriends is that
none of them lasted long. Pretty rather than beautiful, shehad a flat, flapperish figure, but she used what she had to
maximum advantage—she sent her uniforms back home to
be tailored—and there was something vibrantly sexy about
her ravenous, too-wide gaze. You wanted to meet it and be
devoured by it.
Janet was about as annoying as a person could be and
still be your friend, but Quentin was never bored around her.
She was passionately loyal, and if she was obnoxious it
was only because she was so deeply tender-hearted. It
made her easily wounded, and when she was wounded she
lashed out. She tortured everybody around her, but only
because she was more tortured than anyone.
Even though he was part of the Physical Kids now, Quentin
still spent most of his time with the other Third Years: he
took his classes with them, and worked with them in P.A.,
and studied for exams with them, and sat with them at
dinner. The Maze had been scrambled and redrawn over
the summer—as it was every summer, it turned out—and
they spent a week’s worth of afternoons relearning it, yelling
at one another over the tall hedges when they got lost or
found an especially sweet shortcut.
They threw a party in honor of the fall equinox—there was
a strong undercurrent of Wiccan sentiment at Brakebills,
though hardly anybody took it seriously except the Naturals.
They had a bonfire and music and a Wicker Man, and a
light show by the Illusionists, and everybody stayed out way
too late, their noses running in the cold fall air, their faces
hot and red from the fire. Alice and Quentin taught the
others the fire-shaping spell, which was a big hit, and
Amanda Orloff revealed that she’d been brewing a batch of
mead on the sly for the past couple of months. It was sweet
and fizzy and disgusting, and they all drank way too much of
it and felt like death the next day.
That fall Quentin’s studies changed again. There wasless rote learning of gestures and arcane languages,
though God knows there was plenty of that, and more actual
spellcasting. They spent an entire month on low-level
architectural magic: spells to strengthen foundations and
rain-proof roofs and keep gutters free of rotting leaves, all
of which they practiced on a pathetic little shed barely
larger than a doghouse. Just one spell, to make a roof
resistant to lightning, took Quentin three days to memorize,
grinding the gestures in a mirror to get them exactly right, at
the proper speed and with the proper angles and
emphasis. And then there was the incantation, which was in
a corrupt old Bedouin Arabic and very tricky. And then
Professor March conjured a little rainstorm which emitted a
single lightning bolt that sheared through it in one eye-
searing, ego-demolishing instant, while Quentin stood there
getting soaked to the skin.
On alternate Tuesdays Quentin worked with Bigby, the
Physical Kids’ unofficial faculty advisor, who turned out be a
small man with large liquid eyes and close-cropped gray
hair who dressed neatly, if extremely affectedly, in a long
Victorian-looking duster. His posture was slightly hunched,
but he didn’t seem otherwise frail or crippled. Quentin had
the impression that Bigby was a political refugee from
somewhere. He was always making vague noises about
the conspiracy that had ousted him, and what he would do
following his inevitable return to power. He had the stiff,
wounded dignity of the deposed intelligentsia.
One afternoon during a seminar—Bigby specialized in
ridiculously difficult enchantments that transmuted elements
by manipulating their structure on a quantum level—he
paused and performed an odd gesture: he reached back
behind first one shoulder, then the other, unbuttoning
something back there. The movement reminded Quentin of
nothing more than a woman unhooking her bra. When
Bigby was finished four magnificent insect wings like a
dragonfly’s, two on each side, sprang out from behind him.
He flexed them with a deep, satisfied sigh.
The wings were gauzy and iridescent. They disappearedfor a second in a buzz of activity, then reappeared as they
became still.
“Sorry,” he said. “Couldn’t stand it a minute more.”
It never stopped, the weirdness of this place. It just went
on and on.
“Professor Bigby, are you a—” Quentin stopped. A what?
An elf? An angel? He was being rude, but he couldn’t help
it. “Are you a fairy?”
Bigby smiled a pained smile. His wings made a dry
chitinous rattle.
“Pixie, technically,” he said.
He seemed a little sensitive about it.
One morning, very early, Professor March was giving a
lecture on weather magic and summoning cyclonic wind
patterns. For a portly man he was surprisingly spry. Just
looking at him bouncing on his toes, with his red ponytail
and his red face, made Quentin want to go back to bed. In
the mornings Chambers served tarry black espresso which
he smelted in a delicate, gilded-glass exotic Turkish
device. But it was all gone by the time Quentin came down
for class.
He closed his eyes. When he opened them again
Professor March was addressing him directly.
“. . . between a subtropical cyclone and an extratropical?
Quentin? In the French, please, if you can.”
Quentin blinked. He must have drifted off.
“The difference?” he hazarded. “There is no difference?”
There was a long, awkward pause, into which Quentin
inserted more words in an attempt to find out what exactly
the question had been, and to say “baroclinic zones” asmany times as possible just in case they were relevant.
People shifted in their chairs. March, having caught the
delicious scent of humiliation, was prepared to wait.
Quentin waited, too. There was something in the reading
about this. He’d actually done it, that was the injustice of it.
The moment stretched on and on. His face was on fire.
This wasn’t even magic, it was meteorology.
“I don’t understand—” came a voice from the back of the
classroom.
“I’m asking Quentin, Amanda.”
“But maybe you could clarify something?” It was Amanda
Orloff. She persisted, with the shit-eating blitheness of
somebody who had academic cred to burn. “For the rest of
us? Whether these are barotropic cyclones or not? I find it a
little confusing.”
“They are all barotropic, Amanda,” March said,
exasperated. “It’s irrelevant. All tropical cyclones are
barotropic.”
“But I thought one was barotropic and one was
baroclinic,” Alice put in.
The resulting mass wrangle ended up being so inane
and time-consuming that March was forced to abandon
Quentin and move on or lose the entire thread of the
lecture. If he could have done so unobtrusively, Quentin
would have run back to where Amanda Orloff was sitting
and kissed her on her broad, unmoisturized forehead.
Instead he settled for blowing her a kiss when March wasn’t
looking.
March had segued into a lengthy spell that involved
sketching an elaborate mandala-like symbol on the
chalkboard. He stopped every thirty seconds and stepped
back to the edge of the stage, hands on hips, whispering to
himself, then dove back into the design. The point of the
spell was fairly trivial—it either guaranteed hail or
prevented it, one or the other, Quentin wasn’t reallyfollowing, and anyway the principle was the same.
Either way, Professor March was struggling with it. The
spell was in a very proper and precise Medieval Dutch that
evidently wasn’t his forte. It occurred to Quentin that it might
be nice if he screwed it up. He hadn’t particularly enjoyed
being called out on technical minutiae this early in the
morning. He would play a tiny prank.
Brakebills classrooms were proofed against most forms
of mischief, but it was well known that the podium was any
teacher’s Achilles’ heel. You couldn’t do much to it, but the
wards on it weren’t quite ironclad, and with a lot of effort
and some body English you could get it to rock back and
forth a little. Maybe that would be enough to throw
Professor March (the students called him “Death” March)
off his game. Quentin made a few small gestures under his
desk, between his knees. The podium stirred, as if it were
stretching a kink in its back, then became inert again.
Success.
March was reeling off some extra Old High Dutch. His
attention flicked down at the podium as he felt it move, and
he hesitated but recovered his concentration and forged
ahead. It was either that or start the whole spell over.
Quentin was disappointed. But Infallible Alice leaned
over.
“Idiot,” she whispered. “He dropped the second syllable.
He should have said—”
Just then, for an instant, the film of reality slipped off the
spokes of its projector. Everything went completely askew
and then righted itself again as if nothing had happened.
Except that, like a continuity error in a movie, there was
now a man standing behind Professor March.
He was a small man, conservatively dressed in a neat
gray English suit and a maroon club tie that was fixed in
place with a silver crescent-moon pin. Professor March,
who was still talking, didn’t seem to realize he was there—the man looked out at the Third Years archly,
conspiratorially, as if they were sharing a joke at the
teacher’s expense. There was something odd about the
man’s appearance—Quentin couldn’t seem to make out his
face. For a second he couldn’t figure out why, and then he
realized it was because there was a small leafy branch in
front of it that partially obscured his features. The branch
came from nowhere. It was attached to nothing. It just hung
there in front of the man’s face.
Then Professor March stopped speaking and froze in
place.
Alice had stopped, too. The room was silent. A chair
creaked. Quen tin couldn’t move either. There was nothing
restraining him, but the line between his brain and his body
had been cut. Was the man doing this? Who was he? Alice
was still leaned over slightly in his direction, and a fly-away
wisp of her hair hung in his field of vision. He couldn’t see
her eyes; the angle was wrong. Everything and everybody
was still. The man on the stage was the only thing in the
world still in motion.
Quentin’s heart started to pound. The man cocked his
head and frowned, as if he could hear it. Quentin didn’t
understand what had happened, but something had gone
wrong. Adrenaline poured into his bloodstream, but it had
nowhere to go. His brain was boiling in its own juices. The
man began strolling around the stage, exploring his new
environment. His demeanor was that of a gentleman
balloonist who had accidentally touched down in exotic
surroundings: inquisitive, amused. With the branch in front
of his face his intentions were impossible to read.
He circled Professor March. There was something
strange about the way he moved, something too fluid about
his gait. When he walked into the light, Quentin saw that he
wasn’t quite human, or if he had been once he wasn’t
anymore. Below the cuffs of his white shirt his hands had
three or four too many fingers.
Fifteen minutes crawled by, then half an hour. Quentincouldn’t turn his head, and the man moved in and out of his
field of view. He puttered with Professor March’s
equipment. He toured the auditorium. He took out a knife
and pared his fingernails. Objects stirred and shifted
restlessly in place whenever he walked too near them. He
picked up an iron rod from March’s demonstration table
and bent it like a piece of licorice. Once he cast a spell—he
spoke too fast for Quentin to catch the details—that made
all the dust in the room fly up and whirl crazily in the air
before settling down again. It had no other obvious effect.
When he cast the spell, the extra fingers on his hands bent
sideways and backward.
An hour passed, then another. Quentin’s fear came and
went and came back in huge sweating rushes, crashing
waves. He was sure something very bad was happening, it
just wasn’t clear yet exactly what. He knew it had something
to do with his joke on March. How could he have been so
stupid? In a cowardly way he was glad he couldn’t move. It
spared him from having to attempt something brave.
The man seemed barely aware that he was in a room full
of people. There was something grotesquely comic about
him—his silence was like that of a mime. He approached a
ship’s clock that hung at the back of the stage and slowly
put his fist through it—he didn’t punch it, he forced his hand
into its face, breaking the glass and snapping the hands
and crushing the mechanism inside until he was satisfied
that it was destroyed. It was as if he thought he would hurt it
more that way.
Class should have been over ages ago. Somebody on
the outside must have noticed by now. Where were they?
Where was Fogg? Where the hell was that paramedic-
nurse-woman when you really needed her? He wished he
knew what Alice was thinking. He wished he could have
turned his head just a few degrees more before he’d been
frozen, so he could see her face.
Amanda Orloff’s voice broke the silence. She must have
gotten loose somehow and was chanting a spell,rhythmically and rapidly but calmly. The spell was like
nothing Quentin had ever heard, an angry, powerful piece of
magic, full of vicious fricatives—it was offensive magic,
battle magic, designed to literally rip an opponent to
pieces. Quentin wondered how she’d even learned it. Just
knowing a spell like that was way off-limits at Brakebills, let
alone casting it. But before she could finish her voice
became muffled. It went higher and higher, faster and
faster, like a tape speeding up, then faded out before she
could finish. The silence returned.
Morning turned into afternoon in a fever dream of panic
and boredom. Quentin went numb. He heard signs of
activity from outside. He could see only one window, and
that was out of the very corner of his eye, but something
was going on out there, blocking the light. There were
sounds of hammering and, very faintly, six or seven voices
chanting in unison. A tremendous, silent flash of light burst
behind the door to the corridor with such force that the thick
wood glowed translucent for an instant. There were
rumblings as if somebody were trying to break through the
floor from underneath. None of this visibly bothered the man
in the gray suit.
In the window a single red leaf flapped crazily in the wind
on the end of a bare branch, having hung on longer into the
fall than any of its fellows. Quentin watched it. The wind
flailed the leaf back on forth on the end of its stem. It
seemed like the most beautiful thing he had ever seen. All
he wanted was to go on looking at it for one minute longer.
He would give anything for that, just one more minute with
his little red leaf.
He must have slipped into a trance, or fallen asleep—he
didn’t remember. He woke up to the sound of the man on
stage singing softly and high under his breath. His voice
was surprisingly tender:
“Bye, baby Bunting
Daddy’s gone a-hunting
Gone to get a rabbit skinTo wrap his baby Bunting in”
He lapsed into humming. Then, with no warning, he
vanished.
It happened so silently and so suddenly that at first
Quentin didn’t notice he was gone. In any case his
departure was upstaged by Professor March, who’d been
standing onstage the entire time with his mouth open. The
instant the man was gone March crumpled forward
bonelessly off the stage and knocked himself cold on the
hardwood floor.
Quentin tried to stand up. Instead he slid off his chair,
down onto the floor between the rows of seats. His arms,
legs, and back were hideously cramped. There was no
strength in them. Slowly, lying on the floor in a mixture of
agony and relief, he stretched out his legs. Delicious
bubbles of pain released in his knees, as if he were finally
unbending them after a trans-hemispherical flight in coach.
Tears of relief started in his eyes. It was over. The man was
finally gone and nothing terrible had happened. Alice was
groaning, too. A pair of shoes, probably hers, was in his
face. The whole room rocked with moans and sobs.
Afterward Quentin would learn that Fogg had mustered
the entire staff almost immediately, as soon as the man had
made his appearance. The school’s defensive spells
detected him instantly, even if they didn’t keep him out. By
all accounts Fogg made a surprisingly competent
battlefield commander: calm, organized, rapid and
accurate in his assessment of the situation, skillful in his
deployment of the resources at his disposal.
Over the course of the morning an entire temporary
scaffold had been constructed around the outside of the
tower. Professor Heckler, wearing a welder’s helmet to
shield his eyes, had nearly set the tower on fire with
pyrotechnical attacks. Professor Sunderland had heroically
attempted to phase herself through the wall, but to no avail,
and anyway it wasn’t clear what she would have done if shesucceeded. Even Bigby made an appearance, deploying
some exotic nonhuman witchcraft that—Quentin got the
impression—had made the rest of the faculty a little
uncomfortable.
That evening after dinner, after the usual announcements
about clubs and events and activities had been sullenly and
desultorily attended to, Dean Fogg addressed the student
body to try to explain what had happened.
He stood at the head of the long dining room table,
looking older than usual, as the candles guttered down and
the First Years gloomily cleared the last of the silverware.
He fussed with his cuffs and touched his temples where he
was losing his thin blond hair.
“It will not come as a surprise to many of you that there
are other worlds besides our own,” he began. “This is not
conjecture, it is fact. I have never been to these worlds, and
you will never go there. The art of passing between worlds
is an area of magic about which very little is known. But we
do know that some of these worlds are inhabited.
“Probably the beast we met today was physically quite
vast.” (“The Beast” was what Fogg called the thing in the
gray suit, and afterward nobody ever referred to it any other
way.) “What we saw would have been a small part of it, an
extremity it chose to push into our sphere of being, like a
toddler groping around in a tide pool. Such phenomena
have been observed before. They are known in the
literature as Excrescences.
“Its motivations are difficult to guess.” He sighed heavily.
“To such beings we look like swimmers paddling timidly
across the surface of their world, silhouetted against the
light from above, sometimes diving a little below the
surface but never going very deep. Ordinarily they pay no
attention to us. Unfortunately something about Professor
March’s incantation today caught the Beast’s attention. I
understand it may have been corrupted or interrupted in
some way. That error offered the Beast an opportunity toAt this Quentin convulsed inwardly but kept his face
composed. It had been him. He had done it. Fogg went on.
“The Beast spiraled up out of the depths, like a deep-
water shark intent on seizing a swimmer from below. Its
motivations are impossible to imagine, but it did appear as
if it was looking for something, or someone. I do not know
whether it found what it was looking for. We may never
know.”
Ordinarily Fogg projected an air of certainty and
confidence, tempered by his natural slight ridiculousness,
but that night he looked disoriented. He lost his train of
thought. He fingered his tie.
“The incident is finished now. The students who
witnessed the incident will all be examined, medically and
magically, and then cleansed in case the Beast has
marked or tagged or tainted them. Tomorrow’s classes are
canceled.”
He stopped there and left the room abruptly. Everybody
had thought he would say more.
But all that came much later. Lying on the floor after the
attack, the agony fading from his arms and legs and back,
Quentin felt only good things. He felt relieved to be alive.
Disaster had been averted. He had made a terrible
mistake, but everything was all right now. He felt a profound
gratitude for the old, splintery wooden underside of the
chair he was looking up at. It was fascinating and beautiful.
He could have looked at it forever. It was even a little
thrilling to have been through something like that and lived
to tell about it. In a way he was a hero. He breathed deeply
and felt the good solid floor under his back. The first thing
he wanted to do, he realized, was to put his hand
reassuringly on Alice’s warm soft ankle, which was next to
his head. He was so grateful to be able to finally look at her
again.
He didn’t know yet that Amanda Orloff was dead. TheBeast had eaten her alive.LOVELADY
The rest of Quentin’s Third Year at Brakebills went by
beneath a gray watercolor wash of quasi-military vigilance.
In the weeks that followed the attack the school was locked
down both physically and magi cally. Faculty members
wandered the grounds retracing the lines of its ancient
defensive spells, renewing and strengthening them and
casting new ones. Professor Sunderland spent an entire
day walking backward all the way around the school’s
perimeter, scattering colored powders on the snow behind
her in carefully braided trails, her plump cheeks turning pink
with cold. She was followed by Professor Van der Weghe,
who checked her work, and preceded by a gaggle of
attentive students who cleared brush and fallen logs out of
her path and resupplied her with materiel. It had to be done
in one unbroken circuit.
Cleansing the auditorium was just a matter of ringing a
few bells and burning sage in the corners, but resetting the
school’s main wards took a solid week; according to
student rumor they were all cinched to an enormous
worked-iron totem kept in a secret room at the campus’s
exact geographical center, wherever that was, but nobody
had ever seen it. Professor March, who after his ordeal
never quite lost a certain anxious, hunted look, roamed
endlessly in and out of the school’s many basements and
sub-basements and cellars and catacombs, where he
obsessively tended and reinforced the foundation spells
that secured them against attack from below. The Third
Years had made a bonfire at their Equinox party, but now
the faculty made a real bonfire, fed with specially prepared
cedar logs, dried and peeled and as straight as railroad
ties, stacked in an arcane, eye-bending configuration like a
giant Chinese puzzle that took Professor Heckler all day to
get right. When he finally lit it, using a twist of paper with
words scribbled on it in Russian, it burned like magnesium.
They were discouraged from looking directly at it.In a way it was an education in itself, a chance to watch
real magic being worked, with real things at stake. But
there was no fun in it. There was only silence at dinner, and
useless anger, and a new kind of dread. One morning they
found the room of a First Year boy cleared out; he’d
dropped out and gone home overnight. It was not
uncommon to come across conclaves of three or four girls
—girls who mere weeks earlier had actively avoided sitting
next to Amanda Orloff at dinner—perched together on the
stony rim of a fountain in the Maze, weeping and shivering.
There were two more fights. As soon as he was satisfied
that the foundations were taken care of, Professor March
went on sabbatical, and those who claimed to know—i.e.,
Eliot—put the odds of his ever coming back at
approximately zero.
Sometimes Quentin wished he could run away, too. He
thought he would be shunned for the little joke he’d played
on March with the podium, but the strange thing was that
nobody said anything about it. He almost wished they
would. He didn’t know whether he’d committed the perfect
crime or a crime so public and unspeakable that nobody
could bring themselves to confront him about it in broad
daylight. He was trapped: he couldn’t grieve properly for
Amanda because he felt like he’d killed her, and he couldn’t
atone for killing her because he couldn’t confess, not even
to Alice. He didn’t know how. So instead he kept his little
particle of shame and filth inside, where it could fester and
turn septic.
This was the kind of disaster Quentin thought he’d left
behind the day he walked into that garden in Brooklyn.
Things like this didn’t happen in Fillory: there was conflict,
and even violence, but it was always heroic and ennobling,
and anybody really good and important who bought it along
the way came back to life at the end of the book. Now there
was a rip in the corner of his perfect world, and fear and
sadness were pouring in like freezing filthy water through a
busted dam. Brakebills felt less like a secret garden and
more like a fortified encampment. He wasn’t in a safe littlestory where wrongs were automatically righted; he was still
in the real world, where bad, bitter things happened for no
reason, and people paid for things that weren’t their fault.
A week after the incident Amanda Orloff ’s parents came
to collect her things. No special fuss was made over them,
at their request, but Quentin happened by one afternoon
while they were saying goodbye to the Dean. All of
Amanda’s belongings fit into one trunk and one pathetically
small paisley-fabric suitcase.
Quentin’s heart seized up as he watched them. He was
sure they could see his guilt; he felt like he was covered in
it, sticky with it. But they ignored him. Mr. and Mrs. Orloff
looked more like siblings than husband and wife: both six
feet tall and broad-shouldered, with dishwater hair, his high
and tight, hers in a businesslike shag. They seemed to be
walking in a daze—Dean Fogg was guiding them by the
elbows around something Quentin couldn’t see—and it
took him a minute to figure out that they were heavily
enchanted, so that even now they wouldn’t understand the
nature of the school that their daughter had attended.
That August the Physical Kids straggled back from summer
vacation early. They spent the week before classes
camping out in the Cottage, playing pool and not studying
and making a project out of drinking their way jigger by
jigger through an old and viscous and thoroughly disgusting
decanter of port Eliot had found at the back of a cabinet in
the kitchen. But the mood was sober and subdued.
Incredibly, Quentin was now a Fourth Year at Brakebills.
“We have to have a welters team,” Janet announced one
day.
“No,” Eliot said, “we don’t.”
He lay with one arm over his face on an old leather
couch. They were in the library in the Cottage, exhaustedfrom having done nothing all day.
“Yes, actually we do, Eliot. ” She nudged him sharply in
the ribs with her foot. “Bigby told me. There’s a tournament.
Everybody has to play. They just haven’t announced it yet.”
“Shit,” Eliot, Alice, Josh, and Quentin all said in unison.
“I call equipment manager,” Alice added.
“Why?” Josh moaned. “Why are they doing this to us?
Why, God? ”
“It’s for morale,” Janet said. “Fogg says our spirits need
elevating after last year. Organized welters is part of a
‘return to normalcy.’ ”
“My morale was fine until a minute ago. Fuck, I can’t
stand that game. It’s a perversion of good magic. A
perversion, I say!” Josh waved a finger at nobody in
particular.
“Too bad, it’s compulsory. And it’s by Discipline, so
we’re a team. Even Quentin”—she patted his head—“who
still doesn’t have one.”
“Thanks for that.”
“I vote Janet captain,” Eliot said.
“Of course I’m captain. And as captain it is my happy
duty to inform you that your first practice is in fifteen
minutes.”
Everybody groaned and stirred and then settled
themselves more comfortably where they were.
“Janet?” Josh said. “Stop doing this.”
“I’ve never even played,” Alice said. “I don’t know the
rules.”
She lay on the rug paging limply through an old atlas. It
was full of ancient maps in which the seas were populated
with lovingly engraved marginal monsters, though in these
maps the proportions were inverted, and the monsterswere far larger and more numerous than the continents.
Alice had acquired a pair of uncharacteristically hip
rectangular glasses over the summer.
“Oh, you’ll pick it right up,” Eliot said. “Welters is fun—
and educational!”
“Don’t worry.” Janet leaned down and gave the back of
Alice’s head a maternal kiss. “Nobody really knows the
rules.”
“Except Janet,” Josh said.
“Except me. I’ll see you all there at three.”
She flounced happily out of the room.
In the end it came down to the fact that none of them had
anything better to do, which Janet had clearly been counting
on. They reassembled by the welters board looking
bedraggled and unpromising in the baking summer heat. It
was so bright out you could barely stand to look at the
grass. Eliot clutched the sticky decanter of port, the sleeves
of his dress shirt rolled up. Just seeing it made Quentin feel
dehydrated. Blue summer sky blazed in the water squares.
A grasshopper collided with Quentin’s pants and clung
there.
“So,” Janet said, climbing the ladder to the weather-
beaten wooden judge’s chair in her perilously short skirt.
“Who knows how we start?”
Starting, it emerged, involved picking a square and
throwing a stone called the globe onto it. The stone was
rough marble, bluish in color—it did look a little like a globe
—and about the size of a Ping-Pong ball, though it was
weirdly heavy. Quentin turned out to be unexpectedly
talented at this feat, which was performed at various times
during the game. The real trick was to avoid plunking it into
a water square, in which case the game was forfeit, plus it
was a pain to fish the globe out of the water.
Alice and Eliot were on the same team, facing off againstJosh and Quentin, with Janet refereeing. Janet wasn’t the
most assiduous student of the Physical Kids—that was
Alice—or the most naturally gifted—Eliot—but she was
ferally competitive, and she’d decided to acquire a total
command of the technical intricacies of welters, which really
was an amazingly complicated game.
“Without me you people would be lost!” Janet said, and it
was true.
The game was half strategy, half spell-casting. You
captured squares with magic, or protected them, or
recaptured them by superseding an earlier spell. Water
squares were the easiest, metal the hardest—they were
reserved for summonings and other exotic enchantments.
Eventually a player was supposed to step bodily onto the
board, becoming in effect a playing piece in his or her own
game, and as such vulnerable to direct, personal attacks.
As he approached the edge the meadow around Quentin
seemed to shrink, and the board expanded, as if it were at
the center of a fisheye lens. The trees lost some of their
color, becoming dim and silvery.
Things went quickly in the early rounds as both sides
captured uncontested squares in a free-for-all land grab. As
in chess, there were any number of conventional openings
that had been worked out and optimized long ago. But
once all the free squares were gone they had to start
slugging it out head to head. The afternoon wore on, with
long breaks for Janet’s highly technical welters tutorials.
Eliot disappeared for twenty minutes and came back with
six slender bottles of a very dry Finger Lakes Riesling he’d
apparently been saving for just such an emergency, in two
tin buckets full of melting ice. He hadn’t thought to bring any
glasses, so they swigged straight from the bottles.
Quentin still didn’t have much of a capacity for alcohol,
and the more wine he drank the less he could focus on the
details of the game, which were getting hellishly complex.
Apparently it was legal to transmute squares from one kind
to another, and even make them slide around and switchplaces on the board somehow. By the time the players
themselves had stepped onto the board, everybody was so
drunk and confused that Janet had to tell them where to
stand, which she did with towering condescension.
Not that anybody really cared. The sun drifted down
behind the trees, dappling the grass with shadows, and the
blue of the sky deepened to a luminous aqua. The air was
bathwater warm. Josh fell asleep on the square he was
supposed to be defending and sprawled across a whole
row. Eliot did his impression of Janet, and Janet pretended
to get mad. Alice took off her shoes and dabbled her feet in
a temporarily uncontested water square. Their voices
drifted up and got lost in the summer leaves. The wine was
almost gone, the empty bottles bobbing around in the tin
buckets, which were now full of lukewarm water in which a
wasp had drowned.
Everyone was pretending to be bored to tears, or maybe
they actually were, but Quentin wasn’t. He was
unexpectedly happy, though he instinctively kept it a secret.
In fact he was so full of joy and relief he could barely
breathe. Like a receding glacier the ordeal of the Beast
had left behind it a changed world, jumbled and scraped
and raw, but the earth was finally putting up new green
shoots again. Fogg’s idiotic welters plan had actually
worked. The gray gloom the Beast had cast over the school
was retreating. It was all right for them to be teenagers
again, at least for a little longer. He felt forgiven, though he
didn’t even know by whom.
Quentin imagined how they would all look from above. If
somebody were to gaze down on them from a low-flying
airplane, or a wandering dirigible, five people strewn
around the neat little welters board on the grounds of their
secret, exclusive magical enclave, their voices soft and
unintelligible from a distance, how contented and complete
in themselves that observer would believe them all to be.
And it was actually true. The observer would be right. It was
all real.“Without me,” Janet said again, with fierce glee, blotting
tears of laughter with the heel of her hand, “you people
would be lost .”
If welters restored some of Quentin’s lost equilibrium, it
presented a whole new kind of problem for Josh. They kept
on practicing through the first month of the semester, and
Quentin gradually got the hang of the game. It wasn’t really
about knowing the spells, or the strategy, though you did
have to know them. It was more about getting spells off
perfectly when you had to—it was about that sense of
power that lived somewhere in your chest, that made a
spell strong and vital. Whatever it was, you had to be able
to find it when you needed it.
Josh never knew what he would find. At one practice
Quentin watched him go up against Eliot over one of the
two metal squares on the board. These were made of a
tarnished silvery stuff—one actually was silver, the other
was palladium, whatever that was—with fine swirling lines
and tiny italic words etched into them.
Eliot had chosen a fairly basic enchantment that created
a small, softly glowing orb. Josh attempted a counterspell,
muttering it half-heartedly while sketching a few cursory
gestures with his large fingers. He always looked
embarrassed when he cast spells, as if he never believed
they were actually going to work.
But as he finished, the day went slightly faded and sepia
toned, the way it might if a cloud drifted in front of the sun,
or in the first moments of an eclipse.
“What the hell . . . ?” Janet said, squinting up at the sky.
Josh had successfully defended the square—he’d
abolished Eliot’s will-o’-the-wisp—but he’d gone too far.
Somehow he’d created its inverse, a black hole: he’d
punched a drain hole in the afternoon, and the daylight wasswirling into it. The five Physical Kids gathered around in
the amber light to look, as if it were some unusual and
possibly venomous beetle. Quentin had never seen
anything quite like it. It was like some heavy-duty appliance
had been turned on somewhere, sucking up the energy
needed to light the world and causing a local brown-out.
Josh was the only one who didn’t seem bothered by this.
“How you like me now?” He did a victorious-chicken
dance. “Huh? How do you like Josh now!”
“Wow,” Quentin said. He backed away a step. “Josh,
what is that thing?”
“I don’t know, I just waved my little fingers—” He waggled
his fingers in Eliot’s face. A soft breeze was kicking up.
“Okay, Josh,” Eliot said. “You got me. Shut it down.”
“Had enough? Is it too real for you, magic man?”
“Seriously, Josh,” Alice said. “Please get rid of that thing,
it’s creeping us out.”
By now the whole field was plunged in deep twilight, even
though it was only two in the afternoon. Quentin couldn’t
look directly at the space above the metal square, but the
air around it looked wavy and distorted, the grass behind it
distant and smeared. Underneath it, in a perfect circle that
could have been ruled by a compass, the blades of grass
were standing up perfectly straight, like splinters of green
glass. The vortex drifted lazily to one side, toward the edge
of the board, and a nearby oak tree leaned toward it with a
monstrous creaking sound.
“Josh, don’t be an idiot,” Eliot snapped. Josh had
stopped celebrating. He watched his creation nervously.
The tree groaned and listed ominously. Roots popped
underground like muffled rifle shots.
“Josh! Josh!” Janet shouted.
“All right already! All right!” Josh scrubbed out the spell,and the hole in space vanished.
He looked pale but regretful, resentful: they’d pissed on
his parade. They stood silent in a half circle around the half-
toppled oak. One of its longest branches almost touched
the ground.
Dean Fogg arranged an entire tournament schedule of
weekend welters matches, culminating in a school
championship at the end of the semester. To their surprise
the Physical Kids tended to win their games. They even
beat the snobby, standoffish Psychic group, who made up
for any shortfalls in their spellcasting ability with their
uncannily prescient strategic instincts. Their run of success
continued through October. Their only real rivals were the
Natural Magic group, who in spite of their pacifist, sylvan
ethos were annoyingly hyper-competitive about welters.
Bit by bit the summer atmosphere of balmy congeniality
evaporated as the afternoons got colder and shorter and
the demands of the game started to conflict with their
already crushing academic workload. After a while welters
became a chore just like anything else, except even more
meaningless. As Quentin and the other Physical Kids
became less enthusiastic, Janet got shriller and pushier
about the game, and her shrill pushiness became less
endearing. She couldn’t help it, it was just her neurotic need
to control everything coming out to play, but that didn’t
make it any less of a pain in the ass for the rest of them.
Theoretically they could have gotten out of it by tanking a
match—it would only have taken one—but they didn’t.
Nobody quite had the heart, or the guts.
But Josh’s inconsistency continued to be a problem. On
the morning of the final game of the season, he didn’t show
up at all.
It was a Saturday morning in early November, and they
were playing for the school championship—what Fogg hadgrandly christened the Brakebills Cup, although so far he
hadn’t produced any actual physical vessel that answered
to that name. The grass around the welters field was tricked
out with two ranks of grimly festive wooden bleachers that
looked like something out of old newsreel footage of
college sporting events, and which had probably been lying
disassembled in numbered sections in some unimaginably
dusty storeroom for decades. There was even a VIP box
occupied by Dean Fogg and Professor Van der Weghe,
who clutched a coffee cup in her pink-mittened hands.
The sky was gray, and a heavy wind made the leaves
seethe in the trees. The gonfalons (in Brakebills blue and
brown) strung along the backs of the bleachers fluttered
and snapped. The grass was crunchy with frozen dew.
“Where the hell is he?” Quentin jogged in place to keep
warm.
“I don’t know! ” Janet had her arms around Eliot’s neck,
clinging to him for warmth, which Eliot put up with irritably.
“Fuck him, let’s start,” he said. “I want to get this over
with.”
“We can’t without Josh,” Alice said firmly.
“Who says we can’t?” Eliot tried to dislodge Janet, who
clung to him relentlessly. “We’re better off without him
anyway.”
“I’d rather lose with him,” Alice said, “than win without
him. Anyway, he’s not dead. I saw him just after breakfast.”
“If he doesn’t show up soon, we’re all going to die of
exposure. He’ll be the only one left alive to carry on our
glorious fight.”
Josh’s absence made Quentin worried, about what he
didn’t know.
“I’ll go find him,” Quentin said.
“Don’t be ridiculous. He’s probably—”At that moment the officiating faculty member, a hale,
brick-colored man named Professor Foxtree, strode up to
them wrapped in an ankle-length down parka. Students
respected him instinctively because of his easy good
humor and because he was tall and Native American.
“What’s the holdup?”
“We’re short a player, sir,” Janet told him. “Josh
Hoberman is MIA.”
“So?” Professor Foxtree hugged himself vigorously. His
long hooked nose had a drop on the end of it. “Let’s get this
shit-show on the road, I’d like to be back in the senior
common room by lunchtime. How many do you have?”
“Four, sir.”
“It’ll have to do.”
“Three, actually,” Quentin said. “Sorry, sir, but I have to
find Josh. He should be here.”
He didn’t wait for an answer but set off back toward the
House at a jog, his hands in his pockets, his collar turned
up around his ears to block out the cold.
“Come on, Q!” he heard Janet say. And then,
disgustedly, when it was clear he wasn’t coming back:
“Shit.”
Quentin didn’t know whether to be pissed off at Josh or
worried about him, so he was both. Foxtree was right: it
wasn’t like the game actually mattered. Maybe the bastard
just overslept, he thought as he half-ran over the hard,
frosted turf of the Sea. At least he had his fat to keep him
warm. The fat bastard.
But Josh wasn’t in his bed. His room was a maelstrom of
books and paper and laundry, as usual, some of it floating
loosely in midair. Quen tin walked down to the sunroom, but
its only occupant was the aged Professor Brzezinski, the
potions expert, who sat at the window, eyes closed,
drenched in sun, his white beard flowing down over astained old apron. An enormous fly bounced against one of
the windowpanes. He looked asleep, but when Quentin was
almost out the door he spoke.
“Looking for someone?”
Quentin stopped. “Yes, sir. Josh Hoberman. He’s late for
welters.”
“Hoberman. The fat one.”
The old man waved Quentin over with a blue-veined hand
and fumbled a colored pencil and a piece of lined paper
out of the pocket of his apron. With sure, rapid strokes
Professor Brzezinski sketched a rough outline of the
Brakebills campus. He muttered a few words in French and
made a sign over it with one hand like a compass rose.
He held it up.
“What does this tell you?”
Quentin had expected magical special effects of some
kind, but there was nothing. A corner of the map was
stained from a coffee spill on the tray.
“Not a lot, sir.”
“Really?” The old man studied the paper for himself,
looking puzzled. He smelled like ozone, shattered air, as if
he had recently been struck by lightning. “But this really is a
very good locator spell. Look again.”
“I don’t see anything.”
“That’s right. And where on campus does even a very
good locator spell not work?”
“I have no idea.” Admitting ignorance promptly was the
fastest way to get information out of a Brakebills professor.
“Try the library.” Professor Brzezinski closed his eyes
again, like an old walrus settling back down onto a sunny
rock. “There are so many old seek-and-finds on that room,
you can’t find a Goddamned thing.”Quentin had spent very little time in the Brakebills library.
Hardly anybody did if they could help it. Visiting scholars
had been so aggressive over the centuries in casting
locator spells to find the books they wanted, and spells of
concealment to hide those same books from rival scholars,
that the entire area was more or less opaque to magic, like
a palimpsest that has been scribbled on over and over,
past the point of legibility.
To make matters worse, some of the books had actually
become migratory. In the nineteenth century Brakebills had
appointed a librarian with a highly Romantic imagination
who had envisioned a mobile library in which the books
fluttered from shelf to shelf like birds, reorganizing
themselves spontaneously under their own power in
response to searches. For the first few months the effect
was said to have been quite dramatic. A painting of the
scene survived as a mural behind the circulation desk, with
enormous atlases soaring around the place like condors.
But the system turned out to be totally impractical. The
wear and tear on the spines alone was too costly, and the
books were horribly disobedient. The librarian had
imagined he could summon a given book to perch on his
hand just by shouting out its call number, but in actuality they
were just too willful, and some were actively predatory. The
librarian was swiftly deposed, and his successor set about
domesticating the books again, but even now there were
stragglers, notably in Swiss History and Architecture 300-
1399, that stubbornly flapped around near the ceiling. Once
in a while an entire sub-sub-category that had long been
thought safely dormant would take wing with an
indescribable papery susurrus.
So the library was mostly empty, and it wasn’t hard to
spot Josh in an alcove off the second floor, sitting at a small
square table across from a tall, cadaverously thin man with
chiseled cheekbones and a pencil mustache. The man
wore a black suit that hung on him. He looked like an
undertaker.Quentin recognized the thin man: he was the magical
bric-a-brac dealer who turned up once or twice a year at
Brakebills in his woodie station wagon, loaded down with a
bizarre collection of charms and fetishes and relics.
Nobody particularly liked him, but the students tolerated
him, if only because he was unintentionally funny and
annoyed the faculty, who were always on the verge of
banning him permanently. He wasn’t a magician himself
and couldn’t tell the difference between what was genuine
and what was junk, but he took himself and his stock
extremely seriously. His name was Lovelady.
He’d turned up again shortly after the incident with the
Beast, and some of the younger kids bought charms to
protect themselves in the event of another attack. But Josh
knew better than that. Or Quentin would have thought so.
“Hey,” Quentin said, but as he started toward them he
knocked his forehead against a hard invisible barrier.
Whatever it was was cool and squeaked like clean glass.
It was soundproof, too: he could see their lips moving, but
the alcove was silent.
He caught Josh’s eye. There was a quick exchange with
Lovelady, who peered over his shoulder at Quentin.
Lovelady didn’t look happy, but he picked up what looked
like an ordinary glass tumbler that had been standing
upside-down on the table and flipped it over. The barrier
vanished.
“Hey,” Josh said sullenly. “What’s up?” His eyes were
red, and the bags under them were dark and bruised-
looking. He didn’t look especially happy to see Quentin
either.
“What’s going on?” Quentin ignored Lovelady. “You know
we have a match this morning, right?”
“Oh, man. Right. Game time.” Josh smeared his right eye
blearily with the heel of his hand. Lovelady watched them
both, carefully husbanding his dignity. “How long do wehave?”
“About negative half an hour.”
“Oh, man,” he said again. Josh put his forehead down on
the table, then looked up suddenly at Lovelady. “Got
anything for time travel? Time-turner or something?”
“Not at this time,” Lovelady intoned gravely. “But I will
make inquiries.”
“Awesome.” Josh stood up. He saluted smartly. “Send
me an owl.”
“Come on, they’re waiting for us. Fogg is freezing his ass
off.”
“Good for him. Too much ass on that man anyway.”
Quentin got Josh out of the library and heading toward
the rear of the House, though he was moving slowly and
with a worrying tendency to lurch into door frames and
occasionally into Quentin.
He did an abrupt about-face.
“Hang on,” he said. “Gotta get my quidditch costume. I
mean uniform. I mean welters.”
“We don’t have uniforms.”
“I know that,” Josh snapped. “I’m drunk, I’m not
delusional. I still need my winter coat.”
“Jesus, man. It’s not even ten o’clock.” Quentin couldn’t
believe he’d been worried. This was the big mystery?
“Experiment. Thought it might relax me for the big game.”
“Yeah?” Quentin said. “Really? How’s that working out for
you?”
“It was just a little Scotch, for Christ’s sake. My parents
sent me a bottle of Lagavulin for my birthday. Eliot’s the
lush around here, not me.” Josh looked up at him with his
crafty, stubbly monk’s face. “Relax, I know what I canhandle.”
“Yeah, you’re handling the hell out of it.”
“Oh, who gives a shit!” Josh was turning nasty. If Quentin
was going to get mad, he would get madder. “You were
probably hoping I wouldn’t show up and blow your precious
game for you. I just wish you had the balls to admit it. God,
you should hear Eliot do you behind your back. You’re as
much of a cheerleader as Janet is. At least she has the tits
for it.”
“If I wanted to win,” Quentin said coldly, “I would have left
you in the library. Everybody else wanted to.”
He waited in the doorway, furious, arms folded, while
Josh rifled through his clothes. He snatched his coat off the
back of a desk chair, causing the chair to fall over. He let it
lie there. Quentin wondered if it was true about Eliot. If Josh
was trying to hurt him, he certainly knew where to stick the
knife in.
They set off down the hall together in silence.
“All right,” Josh said finally. He sighed. “Look, you know
how I’m kind of a fuck-up, right?”
Quentin said nothing, stone-faced. He didn’t feel like
playing into Josh’s personal drama right now.
“Well, I am. And don’t bother with the self-esteem lecture,
it’s gone so far beyond what you even want to know about.
I’ve always been a smart guy, but I’m a low-grades/high-
test-scores kind of smart guy. If it wasn’t for Fogg they
would have kicked me out after last semester.”
“All right.”
“Look, all the rest of you can go around playing Peter
Perfect, and that’s fine, but I have to work my ass off just to
stay here! If you saw my grades—you guys don’t even know
the alphabet goes that high.”
“We all have to work at it,” Quentin said a littledefensively. “Well, except Eliot.”
“Yeah, okay, fine. But it’s fun for you. You get off on it.
That’s your thing.” Josh shouldered his way through the
French doors, out into the late-autumn morning, shrugging
his way into his heavy overcoat at the same time. “Fuck, it’s
cold. Look, I love it here, but I’m not going to make it on my
own. I just don’t know where it comes from.”
With no warning he grabbed the front of Quentin’s coat
and pushed him up against the wall of the House.
“Don’t you get it? I don’t know where it comes from! I do
a spell, I don’t know if it’s going work or not!” His normally
soft, placid face had worked itself into a mask of anger.
“You look for the power, and it’s just there! Me, I never
know! I never know if it’s going to be there when I need it. It
comes and it goes and I don’t even know why!”
“Okay, okay.” Quentin put his hands on Josh’s shoulders,
trying to calm him down. “Jesus. You’re hurting my man-
boobs.”
Josh let go of him and stalked off in the direction of the
Maze. Quentin caught up with him.
“So you thought Lovelady could help.”
“I thought he could . . . I don’t know.” Josh shrugged
helplessly. “Give me a little boost. Just make it so I could
count on it a little more.”
“By selling you some trash he got off eBay.”
“You know, he has interesting connections.” Just like that
Josh was finding his good humor again. He always did.
“They act all superior when we’re watching, but some of the
faculty buy from Lovelady. I heard a couple of years ago
Van der Weghe bought an old brass door knocker off him
that turned out to be a Hand of Oberon. Chambers uses it
to cut down trees around the Sea.
“I thought he could sell me a charm. Something to bring
my grades up. I know I act like I don’t care, but I want to stayhere, Quentin! I don’t want to go back out there!”
He pointed off in the general direction of the outside
world. The grass was wet and half frozen, and the Sea was
misty.
“I want you to stay, too,” Quentin said. His anger was
going, too. “But Lovelady—Jesus, maybe you are an idiot.
Why didn’t you just go to Eliot for help?”
“Eliot. He’s the last guy I’d talk to. Don’t you see how he
looks at me in class? A guy like that—okay, he’s had it
tough, in lots of ways, but this isn’t the kind of thing he
understands.”
“What did Lovelady try to sell you?
“Bunch of old dust bunnies. Bastard told me they were
Aleister Crow ley’s ashes.”
“What were you going to do with them anyway? Snort
them?”
They pushed their way through the scrim of trees around
the field. It was a grim scene. Eliot and Janet were huddled
at one end of the board looking bedraggled and thoroughly
chilled. Poor Alice was out on the board, squatting on a
stone square and hugging herself miserably. The Natural
Magic group was at the other end; despite the Physical
Kids’ shortfall, they had chosen to field the full five players.
Not very sportsmanlike. It was hard to see their faces—in
an effort to intimidate their opponents they wore hooded
druid robes that somebody had sewn together out of a
bunch of green velvet curtains. They weren’t made to get
wet.
The Physical Kids gave a ragged cheer when Josh and
Quentin appeared.
“My heroes,” Janet said sarcastically. “Where did you
find him?”
“Somewhere warm and dry,” Josh said.They were being beaten badly, but Josh’s surprise
reappearance revived their fighting spirit. On his first turn
Josh went for the silver square, and after five solid minutes
of Gregorianesque chanting he improbably brought into
being a fiery elemental—a slow-moving, woodchuck-size
salamander that looked like it was constructed out of
glowing orange embers, and which went on to laconically
capture two adjacent squares for good measure. It then
settled down on its six legs to smolder and watch the rest of
the match, raindrops sizzling and skating off its charred
scales.
The Physical Kids’ comeback had the unfortunate effect
of lengthening the game beyond all possibility of enjoyment.
It was the longest game they’d played all season; it was
shaping up to be the longest welters game anybody could
remember. Finally after another hour the handsome,
Scandinavian-looking captain of the Natural team—whom
Quentin was pretty sure Janet used to date—toed the edge
of the sand square he stood on, gathered his wet velvet
robe around him regally, and caused an elegantly twisted
little olive tree to curl up out of a grass square in the
Physicals’ home row.
“Suck it!” he said.
“That’s the win,” Professor Foxtree called from the
judge’s chair. He was visibly catatonic from boredom.
“Unless you Physicals can match it. If not, then this damn
game is finally over. Somebody throw the globe.”
“Come on, Q,” Eliot said. “My fingernails are blue. My lips
are probably blue.”
“Your balls are probably blue,” Quentin said. He picked
up the heavy marble from where it rested in a stone bowl by
the edge of the board.
He looked around at the strange scene he stood at the
center of. They were still in it—they’d been down, but they’d
come almost all the way back, and he hardly ever missed
with the globe. Mercifully there was no wind, but a mist wasgathering, and it was getting hard to see the far end of the
board. The afternoon was silent except for the dripping of
the trees.
“Quentin!” a boy’s voice called hoarsely from the
bleachers. “Quen -tin! ”
The Dean was still up in the VIP box, gamely miming
enthusiasm. He blew his nose loudly into a silk
handkerchief. The sun was a distant memory.
All at once a pleasant feeling of lightness and warmth
came over Quentin—it was so vivid, and so divorced from
the freezing cold reality all around him, that he wondered if
somebody was doing some surreptitious magic on him; he
looked suspiciously at the smoldering salamander, but it
loftily ignored him. There was the familiar sense of the
world narrowing to the limits of the board, trees and people
shrinking and curving away around it, becoming silvery,
solarized. Quentin’s view took in the miserable Josh,
pacing by the edge of the board and taking deep breaths,
and Janet, who was clenching her jaw and jutting it at him
fiercely, hungrily, her arm through Eliot’s, whose eyes were
fixed on some invisible scenery in the middle distance.
It all felt very far away. None of it mattered. That was the
funny thing—it was incredible that he hadn’t seen it before.
He would have to try and explain this to Josh. He had done
a terrible, stupid thing in the classroom, the day Amanda
Orloff had died, and he would never get over it, but he’d
figured out how to live with it. You just had to get some idea
of what matters and what doesn’t, and how much, and try
not to be scared of the stuff that doesn’t. Put it in
perspective. Something like that. Or otherwise what was
the point? He didn’t know if he could explain it to Josh. But
maybe he could show him.
Quentin took off his coat, as if he were sloughing off a
scratchy, too-small skin. He rolled his shoulders in the cold
air; he knew it would be freezing in a minute, but for the
moment it was just refreshing. He sighted on the blondNatural player in his idiotic robe, leaned to one side, and
slung the globe sidearm at his knee. It hit the heavy velvet
with an audible thump.
“Ow!” The Natural grabbed his knee and looked up at
Quentin with an outraged expression. That would bruise.
“Foul!”
“Suck it,” Quentin said.
He whipped his shirt off over his head. Ignoring the rising
yelps of dismay on all sides—it was so easy to ignore
people when you understood how little power they really
had over you—he walked over to where Alice stood,
dumbstruck, on her square. He would probably regret this
later, but God it was good to be a magician sometimes. He
hoisted her over his shoulder fireman-style and jumped with
her into the freezing, cleansing water.MARIE BYRD LAND
Quentin had been wondering about the mystery of the
Fourth Year ever since he got to Brakebills. Everybody did.
The basic facts were common knowledge: every year in
September half the Fourth Years swiftly and silently
disappeared from the House overnight. No one discussed
their absence. The vanished Fourth Years reappeared at
the end of December looking thin and drawn and generally
chewed over, to no particular comment—it was considered
fatally bad form to say anything about it. They quietly mixed
back into the general Brakebills population, and that was
that. The rest of the Fourth Years vanished in January and
came back at the end of April.
Now the first semester of Quentin’s Fourth Year was
almost over, and he had acquired not one single new piece
of information about what happened during that interval.
The secret of where they went and what they did there, or
what was done to them, was improbably well kept. Even
students who took nothing else at Brakebills seriously were
passionately serious on that one point: “Dude, I’m not even
kidding, you so don’t want to be asking me about that . . .”
The disaster of the Beast had thrown off the previous
year’s schedule. The regular contingent of Fourth Years had
departed for the first semester—they were gone when it
happened—but the second-semester group, which
included Eliot, Janet, and Josh, had finished out the year at
Brakebills as usual. To the extent that they speculated
about it, they called themselves “the Spared.” Apparently
whatever the faculty had in store for them was nasty enough
as it was without the added threat of assault by an
interdimensional carnivore.
But now it was back to business as usual. This year half
the Fourth Years departed on schedule, along with a
handful of the Fifth Years: the ten Spared had been split up
between the two semesters, five and five. Whether byaccident or by design, the Physical Kids would all be
shipping out together in January.
It was a regular topic of conversation around the battered
billiard table in the Cottage.
“You know what I bet?” Josh said, one Sunday afternoon
in December. They were treating hangovers with glasses of
Coke and huge quantities of bacon. “I bet they make us go
to normal college. Just some random state school where
we have to read Cannery Row and debate the Stamp Act.
And like the second day Eliot’s going to be crying in the
bathroom and begging for his foie gras and his malbec
while some jock sodomizes him with a lacrosse stick.”
“Um, did that just turn into your total gay fantasy halfway
through?” Janet asked.
“I have it on good authority”—Eliot attempted to jump the
cue ball over the 8 and failed completely, pocketing both,
which seemed not to bother him at all—“on the best of
authority, that the whole Fourth Year enigma is a front. It’s
all a hoax to scare off the faint of heart. You spend the
whole semester on Fogg’s private island in the Maldives,
contemplating the infini ties of the multiverse in grains of
fine white beach sand while coolies bring you rum-and-
tonics.”
“I don’t think they have ‘coolies’ in the Maldives,” Alice
said quietly. “It’s been an independent republic since
1965.”
“So how come everybody comes back all skinny?”
Quentin asked. Janet and Eliot were playing, the rest of
them lay on two beat-up Victorian couches. The room was
small enough that they occasionally had to lean to one side
to avoid the butt end of a cue.
“That’s from all the skinny-dipping.”
“Hork hork hork,” said Janet.
“Quentin should be good at that,” Josh added.“Your fat ass could use some skinny-dipping.”
“I don’t want to go,” Alice said. “Can’t I get a doctor’s
note or something? Like when they let the Christian kids out
of sex ed? Isn’t anybody else worried?”
“Oh, I’m terrified.” If he was joking, Eliot gave no sign of it.
He handed Janet the cue ball. It was decorated with
trompe-l’oeil lunar craters to look like the moon. “I’m not
strong like the rest of you. I’m weak. I’m a delicate flower.”
“Don’t worry, delicate flower,” Janet said. She made her
shot without dropping her gaze, no-look. “Suffering will
make you strong.”
They came for Quentin one night in January.
He knew it would happen at night—it was always at
breakfast that they noticed that the Fourth Years were gone.
It must have been two or three in the morning, but he woke
up instantly when Professor Van der Weghe knocked on
his door. He knew what was going on. The sound of her
husky European voice in the darkness reminded him of his
first night at Brakebills, when she’d put him to bed after his
Examination.
“It’s time, Quentin,” she called. “We are going up to the
roof. Do not bring anything.”
He stepped into his slippers. Outside a file of silent,
rumpled Brakebills students stood on the stairs.
Nobody spoke as Professor Van der Weghe led them
through a door in a stretch of wall that Quentin could have
sworn had been blank the day before, between a pair of
ten-foot-high oil paintings of clipper ships foundering in
heavy seas. They shuffled up the dark wooden stairs
without speaking, fifteen of them—ten Fourth Years, five
leftover Fifth Years—everyone wearing identical navy blue
Brakebills-issue pajamas. Despite Van der Weghe’sorders, Gretchen sullenly gripped a worn black teddy bear
along with her cane. Up ahead of them Professor Van der
Weghe banged open a wooden trapdoor, and they filed out
onto the roof.
It was an awkward perch, a long, narrow, windy strip with
a shingled drop falling away steeply on either side. A low
wrought-iron fence ran along the edge, providing absolutely
no protection or reassurance whatsoever; in fact it was the
perfect height to take you out at the knees if you
accidentally backed into it. The night was bitingly cold, with
a lively cross-breeze. The sky was lightly frosted with high,
wind-whisked clouds luridly backlit by a gibbous moon.
Quentin hugged himself. Still nobody had said a word; no
one even looked at anybody else. It was like they were all
still half asleep, and a single word would have shattered the
delicate dream in which they walked. Even the other
Physical Kids were like strangers.
“Everyone take off your pajamas,” Professor Van der
Weghe called out.
Weirdly, they did. Everything was so surreal and
trancelike already that it made perfect sense that they
would all, guys and girls alike, get naked in front of each
other in the freezing cold without a hint of self-
consciousness. Afterward Quentin even remembered Alice
putting a warm hand on his bare shoulder to steady herself
as she stepped out of her pajama bottoms. Soon they were
naked and shivering, their bare backs and buttocks pale in
the moonlight, the starlit campus rolling away far below
them, with the dark trees of the forest beyond.
Some of the students clutched their pajamas in both
hands, but Professor Van der Weghe instructed them to
drop them in a heap at their feet. Quentin’s blew away and
disappeared over the ledge, but he didn’t try to stop them. It
didn’t matter. She moved down the line, dabbing a
generous gob of chalky white paste on each forehead and
both shoulders with her thumb as she passed. When she
was done, she walked back the other way, lining them up,checking her work, making sure they were standing up
straight. Finally she called out a single harsh syllable.
Instantly a huge soft weight pressed down on Quentin,
settling on his shoulders, bending him forward. He
crouched down, straining against it. He tried to fight it, to lift
it. It was crushing him! He bit back panic. It flashed through
his brain—the Beast was back!—but this was different. As
he doubled over he felt his knees folding up into his belly,
merging with it. Why wasn’t Professor Van der Weghe
helping them? Quentin’s neck was stretching and stretching
out and forward, out of his control. It was grotesque, a
horrible dream. He wanted to vomit but couldn’t. His toes
were melting and flowing together, his fingers were
elongating enormously and spreading out, and something
soft and warm was bursting out of his arms and chest,
covering him completely. His lips pouted grotesquely and
hardened. The narrow strip of roof rose up to meet him.
And then the weight was gone. He squatted on the gray
slate roof, breathing hard. At least he didn’t feel cold
anymore. He looked at Alice, and Alice looked back at him.
But it wasn’t Alice anymore. She had become a large gray
goose, and so had he.
Professor Van der Weghe moved down the line again.
With both hands she picked up each student in turn and
threw him or her bodily off the roof. They all, in spite of the
shock or because of it, reflexively spread out their wings
and caught the air before they could be snared by the bare,
grasping treetops below. One by one they sailed away into
the night.
When it was his turn, Quentin honked in protest.
Professor Van der Weghe’s human hands were hard and
scary and burned against his feathers. He shat on her feet
in panic. But then he was in the air and tumbling. He spread
his wings and beat his way up into the sky, thrashing and
punishing the air till it bore him up. It would have been
impossible not to.Quentin’s new goose-brain, it emerged, was not much
given to reflection. His senses now tracked only a handful of
key stimuli, but it tracked those very, very closely. This body
was made for either sitting or flying, not much else, and as
it happened Quentin was in a mood to fly. In fact, he felt like
flying more than he had ever felt like doing anything in his
entire life.
With no conscious thought or apparent effort, he and his
classmates fell into the classic ragged V formation, with a
Fourth Year named Georgia at the apex. Georgia was the
daughter of the receptionist at a car dealership in Michigan,
and she had come here against her family’s will—unlike
Quen tin, she had confessed fully the nature of Brakebills,
and as a reward for her honesty Georgia’s parents had
tried to have her committed. Thanks to Fogg’s subtle
spellcraft Georgia’s parents believed her to be attending a
vocational institute for troubled adults. Now Georgia, whose
Discipline was an obscure branch of Healing roughly
analogous to endocrinology, and who wore her wiry black
hair cinched at the back with a tortoiseshell barrette, was
leading them southward, her brand-new wings pumping
vigorously.
It was just chance; any one of them could have led the
flock. Quentin was vaguely aware that, although he’d lost
the lion’s share of his cognitive capacity in the
transformation, he’d also picked up a couple of new
senses. One had to do with air: he could perceive wind
speed and direction and air temperature as clearly as
whorls of smoke in a wind tunnel. The sky now appeared to
him as a three-dimensional map of currents and eddies,
friendly rising heat plumes and dense dangerous sinks of
cool air. He could feel the prickle of distant cumulus clouds
swapping bursts of positive and negative electrical charge.
Quentin’s sense of direction had sharpened, too, to the
point where it felt like he had a finely engineered compass
floating in oil, perfectly balanced, at the center of his brain.
He could feel invisible tracks and rails extending away
from him through the air in all directions into the bluedistance. They were the Earth’s lines of magnetic force,
and it was along one of these rails that Georgia was
leading them. She was taking them south. By dawn they
were a mile up and doing sixty miles an hour, overtaking
cars on the Hudson Parkway below them.
They passed New York City, a stony encrustation
crackling with alien heat and electrical sparks and exuding
toxic flatulence. They flew all day, following the coastline,
past Trenton and Philadelphia, sometimes over sea,
sometimes over frozen fields, surfing the temperature
gradients, boosted by updrafts, transferring seamlessly
from current to current as one petered out and the next one
kicked in. It felt fantastic. Quentin couldn’t imagine
stopping. He couldn’t believe how strong he was, how many
wing beats he had stored up in his iron chest muscles. He
just couldn’t contain himself. He had to talk about it.
“Honk!” he yelled. “Honk honk honk honk honk honk
honk! ”
His classmates agreed.
Quentin was shuffled up and down the V in an orderly
fashion, in more or less the same way a volleyball team
rotates serve. Sometimes they plonked down and rested
and fed in a reservoir or a highway median or a badly
drained spot on the lawn of a suburban office park
(landscaping errors were pure gold to geese). Not
infrequently they shared these priceless scraps of real
estate with other V’s, real geese who, sensing their
transformed nature, regarded them with polite amusement.
How long they flew, Quentin couldn’t have said. Once in a
while he caught sight of a land formation he recognized,
and he tried to calculate time and distance—if they flew at
such and such a speed, and the Chesa peake Bay was so
many miles south of New York City, then X number of days
must have passed since . . . what again exactly? The X’s
and blanks and other equationly such-and-such’s stubbornly
refused to fill themselves in. They didn’t want to do theirdance. Quentin’s goose-brain didn’t have the hardware to
handle numbers, nor was it interested in whatever point
those numbers were supposed to prove anyway.
They had gone far enough south now that the weather
was perceptibly warmer, and then they went farther still.
They went south over the Florida Keys, dry, crusty little
nubbins barely poking their heads up out of the ceaselessly
lapping turquoise, then out over the Caribbean, bypassing
Cuba, farther south than any sensible goose had license to
go. They overflew the Panama Canal, no doubt causing any
bird-watchers who happened to spot them to shake their
heads at the lost little V as they dutifully logged it in their
bird journals.
Days, weeks, maybe months and years passed. Who
knew, or cared? Quentin had never experienced peace and
satisfaction like this. He forgot about his human past, about
Brakebills and Brooklyn and James and Julia and Penny
and Dean Fogg. Why hang on to them? He had no name
anymore. He barely had any individual identity, and he
didn’t want one. What good were such human artifacts? He
was an animal. His job was to turn bugs and plants into
muscle and fat and feathers and flight and miles logged. He
served only his flock-fellows and the wind and the laws of
Darwin. And he served whatever force sent him gliding
along the invisible magnetic rails, always southward, down
the rough, stony coast of Peru, spiny Andes on his port, the
sprawling blue Pacific on his starboard. He had never been
happier.
Though it was tougher going now. They splashed down
more rarely and in more exotic locales, widely spaced way
stations that must have been picked out for them in
advance. He’d be cruising along a mile and a half up, one
eye monitoring the rocky ruff of the Andes, feeling his empty
belly and the ache in his chest muscles, when something
would twinkle in the forest a hundred miles down the line,
and sure enough they’d happen upon a freshly flooded
soccer field, or an abandoned swimming pool in some
Shining Path warlord’s ruined villa, rainwater having dilutedalmost to nothing the lingering chemical tang of chlorine.
It was getting colder again, after their long tropical
interlude. Peru gave way to Chile and the grassy, wind-
ruffled Patagonian pampas. They were a lean flock now,
their fat reserves depleted, but nobody turned aside or
hesitated for a second as they plunged suicidally south
from the tip of Cape Horn out over the terrifying blue chaos
of Drake Passage. The invisible highway they rode would
brook no swerving.
There was no playful intra-flock honking now. Quentin
glanced over once at the other branch of the V to see
Janet’s black button eye burning with furious determination
opposite him. They overnighted on a miraculous barge
adrift in deep water and loaded with good things,
watercress and alfalfa and clover. When the bleak gray
shore of Antarctica heaved up over the horizon, they
regarded it not with relief but with collective resignation.
This was no respite. There were no goose names for this
country because geese didn’t come here, or if they did they
never came back. He could see magnetic tracks and rails
converging in the air here, carving in from far away on
either side, like the longitude lines that come crowding
together at the bottom of a globe. The Brakebills V flew
high, the wrinkled gray swells telescopically clear below
them through two miles of dry, salted air.
Instead of a beach a fringe of tumbled boulders
crammed with bizarre, unintelligible penguins crept by, then
blank white ice, the frozen skull of the Earth. Quentin was
tired. The cold tore at his little body through its thin feathery
jacket. He no longer knew what was keeping them aloft. If
one of them dropped, he knew, they would all give up, just
fold their wings and dive for the porcelain white snow, which
would happily devour them.
And then the rail they followed dipped like a dowser’s
rod. It angled them downward, and they slipped and slid
gratefully down it, accepting a loss of altitude in exchange
for speed and blessed relief from the effort of maintainingheight with their burning wings. Quentin could see now that
there was a stone house there in the snow, an anomaly in
the otherwise featureless plain. It was a place of men, and
ordinarily Quentin would have feared it, crapped on it, and
then blown by it and forgotten it.
But no, there was no question, their track ended there. It
buried itself in one of the stone house’s many snowy roofs.
They were close enough now that Quentin could see a man
standing on one of them, waiting for them, holding a long
straight staff. The urge to fly from him was strong, but
exhaustion and above all the magnetic logic of the track
were stronger.
At the very last second he cupped his stiffened wings
and they caught the air like a sail, snatching up the last of
his kinetic energy and breaking his fall. He plopped onto
the snow roof and lay there gasping at the thin atmosphere.
His eyes went dull. The human hadn’t moved. Well, fuck
him. He could do what he wanted with them, pluck them and
gut them and stuff them and roast them, Quentin didn’t care
anymore as long as he could just have one blessed
moment of rest for his aching wings.
The man shaped a strange syllable with his fleshy,
beakless lips and tapped the base of his staff on the roof.
Fifteen pale, naked human teenagers lay in the snow under
the white polar sun.
Quentin woke up in a bare white bedroom. He could not
have guessed to the nearest twenty-four hours how long
he’d been asleep. His chest and arms felt bruised and
achy. He looked at his crude, pink, human hands, with their
stubby featherless fingers. He brought them up to touch his
face. He sighed and resigned himself to being a man
again.
There was very little in the bedroom, and all of it was
white: the bedclothes, the whitewashed walls, the coarsedrawstring pajamas he wore, the white-painted iron
bedstead, the slippers waiting for him on the cold stone
floor. From the small square window Quentin could see he
was on the second floor. His view was of broken snowfields
beneath a white sky, stretching out to the horizon, a
meaningless abstract white line an unjudgable distance
away. My God. What had he gotten himself into?
Quentin shuffled out into the corridor, still in his pajamas
and a thin robe he’d found hanging on a hook on the back
of the door. He found his way downstairs into a quiet, airy
hall with a timbered ceiling; it was identical to the dining hall
at Brakebills, but the vibe was different, more like an Alpine
ski lodge. A long table with benches ran most of the length
of the hall.
Quentin sat down. A man sat alone at one end of the
table, nursing a mug of coffee and staring bleakly at the
picked-over remains of a lavish breakfast. He was sandy-
haired, tall but round-shouldered, with a weak chin and the
beginnings of a paunch. His dressing gown was much
whiter and fluffier than Quentin’s. His eyes were a pale,
watery green.
“I let you sleep,” he said. “Most of the others are already
up.”
“Thanks.” Quentin scooched down the bench to sit
across from him. He rummaged through the leftover plates
and dishes for a clean fork.
“You are at Brakebills South.” The man’s voice was oddly
flat, with a slight Russian accent, and he didn’t look directly
at Quentin when he talked. “We are about five hundred
miles from the South Pole. You flew in over the
Bellingshausen Sea on your way in from Chile, over a
region called Ellsworth Land. They call this part of
Antarctica Marie Byrd Land. Admiral Byrd named it after
his wife.”
He scratched his tousled hair unself-consciously.“Where’s everybody else?” Quentin asked. There didn’t
seem to be any point in being formal, since they were both
wearing bathrobes. And the cold hash browns were
unbelievably good. He hadn’t realized how hungry he was.
“I gave them the morning.” He waved in no particular
direction. “Classes begin in the afternoon.”
Quentin nodded, his mouth full.
“What kind of classes?” he managed.
“What kind of classes,” the man repeated. “Here at
Brakebills South you will begin your education in magic. Or
I suppose you thought that was what you were doing with
Professor Fogg?”
Questions like that always confused Quentin, so he
resorted to honesty.
“Yes, I did think that.”
“You are here to internalize the essential mechanisms of
magic. You think”—his accent made it theenk —“that you
have been studying magic.” Medzhik . “You have practiced
your Popper and memorized your conjugations and
declensions and modifications. What are the five Tertiary
Circumstances?”
It popped out automatically. “Altitude, Age, Position of
the Pleiades, Phase of the Moon, Nearest Body of Water.”
“Very good,” he said sarcastically. “Magnificent. You are
a genius.”
With an effort Quentin decided not to be stung by this. He
was still enjoying the Zen afterglow of having been a goose.
And the hash browns.
“Thank you.”
“You have been studying magic the way a parrot studies
Shakespeare. You recite it like you are saying the Pledge
of Allegiance. But you do not understand it.”“I don’t?”
“To become a magician you must do something very
different,” the man said. This was clearly his set piece. “You
cannot study magic. You cannot learn it. You must ingest it.
Digest it. You must merge with it. And it with you.
“When a magician casts a spell, he does not first
mentally review the Major, Minor, Tertiary, and Quaternary
Circumstances. He does not search his soul to determine
the phase of the moon, and the nearest body of water, and
the last time he wiped his ass. When he wishes to cast a
spell he simply casts it. When he wishes to fly, he simply
flies. When he wants the dishes done, they simply are.”
The man muttered something, tapped once resonantly on
the table, and the dishes began noisily arranging
themselves into stacks as if they were magnetized.
“You need to do more than memorize, Quentin. You must
learn the principles of magic with more than your head. You
must learn them with your bones, with your blood, your liver,
your heart, your deek .” He grabbed his crotch through his
dressing gown and gave it a shake. “We are going to
submerge the language of spellcasting deep into who you
are, so that you have it always, wherever you are, whenever
you need it. Not just when you have studied for a test.
“You are not going on a mystical adventure here, Quentin.
This process will be long and painful and humiliating and
very, very ”—he practically shouted the word—“boring. It is a
task best performed in silence and isolation. That is the
reason for your presence here. You will not enjoy the time
you spend at Brakebills South. I do not encourage you to
try.”
Quentin listened to this in silence. He didn’t especially
like this man, who had just referred to his penis and whose
name he still didn’t know. He put it out of his mind and
focused on cramming starch into his depleted body.
“So how do I do that?” Quentin mumbled. “Learn things inmy bones? Or whatever?”
“It is very hard. Not everybody does. Not everybody can.”
“Uh-huh. What happens if I can’t?”
“Nothing. You go back to Brakebills. You graduate. You
spend your life as a second-rate magician. Many do.
Probably you never realize it. Even the fact that you failed is
beyond your ability to comprehend.”
Quentin had no intention of letting that happen to him,
though it occurred to him that probably nobody actually set
out to have that happen to them, and, statistically speaking,
it had to happen to somebody. The hash browns no longer
tasted quite so scrumptious. He put his fork down.
“Fogg tells me you are good with your hands,” the sandy-
haired man said, relenting a little. “Show me.”
Quentin’s fingers were still stiff and sore from having
served as wings, but he picked up a sharp knife that looked
decently balanced, carefully cleaned it off with a napkin,
and held it between the last two fingers in his left hand. He
spun it, finger by finger, as far as his thumb, then he tossed
it up almost to the ceiling—still spinning, careful to let it
pass between two rafters—with the idea that it would fall
and bury itself in the table between the third and fourth
fingers of his outstretched left hand. This was best done
without looking, maintaining eye contact with his audience
for maximum effect.
Quentin’s breakfast companion picked up a loaf of bread
and stuck it out so that the falling knife speared it. He
tossed loaf and knife contemptuously on the table.
“You take stupid risks,” the man said stonily. “Go on and
join your friends. I think”— theenk —“you will find them on the
roof of the West Tower.” He pointed to a doorway. “We
begin in the afternoon.”
Okay, Mr. Funnylaffs, Quentin thought. You’re the boss.
He stood up. The stranger stood up, too, and shuffled offin another direction. He had the air of a disappointed man.
Stone for stone, board for board, Brakebills South was the
same house as the House at Brakebills. Which was
reassuring, in a way, but it was incongruous to find what
looked like an eighteenth-century English country house
planted in the middle of a soaring Antarctic wasteland. The
roof of the West Tower was be broad and round and paved
with smooth flagstones, with a stone wall running around the
edge. It was open to the elements, but some kind of
magical arrangement kept the air warm and humid and
protected it from the wind, or mostly. Quentin imagined he
could feel a deep chill lurking underneath the warmth
somewhere. The air was tepid, but the floor, the furniture,
everything he touched was cool and clammy. It was like
being in a warm greenhouse in the dead of winter.
As promised, the rest of the Brakebills group was up
there, standing around dazed in threes and fours, staring
out at the snowpack and talking in low tones, bathed in the
eerie, even Antarctic light. They looked different. Their
waists were trimmer, and their shoulders and chests were
sturdier, huskier. They’d lost fat and packed on muscle
during their flight south. Their jaws and cheekbones were
sharply defined. Alice looked lovely and gaunt and lost.
“Honk honk honkonk honk honk! ” Janet said when she
saw Quentin. People laughed, though Quentin had the
impression she’d already made that joke a few times.
“Hey, man,” Josh said, trying to sound nonchalant. “Is this
place fucked up or what?”
“Doesn’t seem so bad,” Quentin said. “What time is
skinny-dipping?”
“I might have been a little off base with that,” Eliot said
gloomily, also probably not for the first time. “We did all get
naked, anyway.”They were all wearing identical white pajamas. Quentin
felt like an inmate in an insane asylum. He wondered if Eliot
was missing his secret boyfriend of the moment, whoever it
was.
“I ran into Nurse Ratched downstairs,” he said. The
pajamas had no pockets, and Quentin kept looking for
somewhere to put his hands. “He gave me a speech about
how stupid I am and how miserable he’s going to make
me.”
“You slept through our little meet’n’greet. That’s
Professor Mayakovsky.”
“Mayakovsky. Like Dean Mayakovsky?”
“He’s the son,” Eliot said. “I always wondered what
happened to him. Now we know.”
The original Mayakovsky had been the most powerful
magician in a wave of international faculty brought in during
the 1930s and 1940s. Until then Brakebills taught English
and American magic almost exclusively, but in the 1930s a
vogue for “multicultural” spellcasting had swept the school.
Professors were imported at huge expense from around
the world, the more remote the better: skirt-wearing
shamans from Micronesian dot-islands; hunch-shouldered,
hookah-puffing wizards from inner-city Cairo coffeehouses;
blue-faced Tuareg necromancers from southern Morocco.
Legend had it that Mayakovsky senior was recruited from a
remote Siberian location, a cluster of frozen Soviet
blockhouses where local shamanic traditions had
hybridized with sophisticated Muscovite practices brought
there by gulag inmates.
“I wonder how badly you have to fuck up to get this
assignment,” Josh mused.
“Maybe he wanted it,” Quentin said. “Maybe he likes it
here. Dude must be in creepy loner heaven.”
“I think you were right, I think I am going to be the first one
to crack,” Eliot said, as if he were having a differentconversation. He felt the fluffy stubble on his cheek. “I don’t
like it here. This stuff is giving me a rash.” He fingered the
material of the Brakebills South pajamas. “I think it might
have a stain on it.”
Janet rubbed his arm comfortingly. “You’ll be okay. You
survived Oregon. Is this worse than Oregon?”
“Maybe if I ask nicely he’ll turn me back into a goose.”
“Oh my God!” said Alice. “Never again. Do you realize
we ate bugs? We ate bugs!”
“What do you mean, never again? How do you think
we’re getting back?”
“You know what I liked about being a goose?” Josh said.
“Being able to crap wherever I wanted.”
“I’m not going back.” Eliot threw a white pebble out into
the white bleakness, where it became invisible before it hit
the ground. “I could fly to Australia from here. Or New
Zealand—the vineyards there are really coming along.
Some nice sheep farmer will adopt me and feed me
sauvignon blanc and turn my liver into a wonderful foie
gras.”
“Maybe Professor Mayakovsky can turn you into a kiwi
bird,” Josh said helpfully.
“Kiwi birds can’t fly.”
“Anyway, he didn’t strike me as the kind of guy who’s
going to do us a lot of favors,” Alice said.
“He must spend a lot of time alone,” Quentin said. “I
wonder if we should we feel bad for him.”
Janet snorted.
“Honk honk honk honk honk!”There was no reliable way to measure time at Brakebills
South. There were no clocks, and the sun was a dull white
fluorescence permanently thumb-tacked half an inch above
the white horizon. It made Quentin think of the
Watcherwoman, how she was always trying to stop time.
She would have loved this place.
That first morning they talked and mingled on the roof of
the West Tower for what felt like hours, huddling together to
cope with all the strangeness. Nobody felt like going back
downstairs, even after they got tired of standing and ran out
of things to talk about, so they all sat around the edge of the
roof with their backs against the stone wall and just stared
off into the pale, hazy distance, bathed in the weird,
directionless, all-permeating white light reflecting off the
snow.
Quentin leaned his back against the cool stone and
closed his eyes. He felt Alice put her head on his shoulder.
If nothing else, he could hang on to her. Whatever else
changed, she was always the same. They rested.
Later, it might have been minutes or hours or days, he
opened his eyes. He tried to say something and
discovered that he couldn’t talk.
Some of the others were on their feet already. Professor
Mayakovsky had appeared at the head of the stairs, his
white bathrobe belted over his gut. He cleared his throat.
“I’ve taken the liberty of depriving you of the power of
speech,” he said. He tapped his Adam’s apple. “There will
be no talking at Brakebills South. It is the hardest thing to
adjust to, and I find it eases the transition if I simply prevent
you from speaking for your first weeks here. You may
vocalize for the purposes of spellcasting, but for no other
reason.”
The class stared at him mutely. Mayakovsky seemed to
be more comfortable now that nobody could answer back.
“If you will all follow me downstairs, it is time for your firstlesson.”
One thing had always confused Quentin about the magic
he read about in books: it never seemed especially hard to
do. There were lots of furrowed brows and thick books and
long white beards and whatnot, but when it came right down
to it, you memorized the incantation—or you just read it off
the page, if that was too much trouble—you collected the
herbs, waved the wand, rubbed the lamp, mixed the potion,
said the words—and just like that the forces of the beyond
did your bidding. It was like making salad dressing or
driving stick or assembling Ikea furniture—just another skill
you could learn. It took some time and effort, but compared
to doing calculus, say, or playing the oboe—well, there
really was no comparison. Any idiot could do magic.
Quentin had been perversely relieved when he learned
that there was more to it than that. Talent was part of it—
that silent, invisible exertion he felt in his chest every time a
spell came out right. But there was also work, hard work,
mountains of it. Every spell had to be adjusted and
modified in a hundred ways according to the prevailing
Circumstances—they adorned the word with a capital letter
at Brakebills—under which it was cast. These
Circumstances could be just about anything: magic was a
complicated, fiddly instrument that had to be calibrated
precisely to the context in which it operated. Quentin had
committed to memory dozens of pages of closely printed
charts and diagrams spelling out the Major Circumstances
and how they affected any given enchantment. And then,
once you had all that down, there were hundreds of
Corollaries and Exceptions to memorize too.
As much as it was like anything, magic was like a
language. And like a language, textbooks and teachers
treated it as an orderly system for the purposes of teaching
it, but in reality it was complex and chaotic and organic. It
obeyed rules only to the extent that it felt like it, and there
were almost as many special cases and one-time
variations as there were rules. These Exceptions were
indicated by rows of asterisks and daggers and other moreobscure typographical fauna which invited the reader to
peruse the many footnotes that cluttered up the margins of
magical reference books like Tal mudic commentary.
It was Mayakovsky’s intention to make them memorize all
these minutiae, and not only to memorize them but to
absorb and internalize them. The very best spellcasters had
talent, he told his captive, silent audience, but they also had
unusual under-the-hood mental machinery, the delicate but
powerful correlating and cross-checking engines necessary
to access and manipulate and manage this vast body of
information.
That first afternoon Quentin expected a lecture, but
instead, when Mayakovsky was done jinxing their larynxes,
he showed each of them to what looked like a monk’s cell,
a small stone room with a single high, barred window, a
single chair, and a single square wooden table. A shelf of
magical reference books was bolted to one wall. It had the
clean, industrious air of a room that had just been
vigorously swept with a birch-twig broom.
“Sit,” Mayakovsky said.
Quentin sat. The professor placed in front of him, one by
one, like a man setting up a chessboard, a hammer, a
block of wood, a box of nails, a sheet of paper, and a small
book bound in pale vellum.
Mayakovsky tapped the paper.
“Hammer Charm of Legrand,” he said. “You know it?”
Everybody knew it. It was a standard teaching charm.
While simple in theory—all it did was ensure that a
hammered nail would go in straight, in one shot—it was
extraordinarily persnickety to cast. It existed in literally
thousands of permutations, depending on the
Circumstances. Casting Legrand was probably harder than
just hammering the damn nail in the old-fashioned way, but
it came in handy for didactic purposes.
Mayakovsky tapped the book with a thick-nailed finger.“This book, each page describes a different set of
Circumstances. All different. Understand? Place, weather,
stars, season—you will see. You turn the page, you cast the
spell according to each set of Circumstances. Good
practice. I’ll come back when you finish book. Khorosho? ”
Mayakovsky’s Russian accent was getting thicker as the
day wore on. He was dropping his contractions and definite
articles. He closed the door behind him. Quentin opened
the book. Somebody not very creative had written
ABANDON HOPE ALL YE WHO ENTER HERE on the first
page. Something told Quentin that Mayakovsky had noticed
the graffiti but let it stand.
Soon Quentin knew Legrand’s Hammer Charm better
than he wanted to know any spell ever. Page by page the
Circumstances listed in the book became more and more
esoteric and counterfactual. He cast Legrand’s Hammer
Charm at noon and at midnight, in summer and winter, on
mountaintops and a thousand yards beneath the earth’s
surface. He cast the spell underwater and on the surface of
the moon. He cast it in early evening during a blizzard on a
beach on the island of Mangareva, which would almost
certainly never happen since Mangareva is part of French
Polynesia, in the South Pacific. He cast the spell as a man,
as a woman, and once—was this really relevant?—as a
hermaphrodite. He cast it in anger, with ambivalence, and
with bitter regret.
By then Quentin’s mouth was dry. His fingertips were
numb. He had pounded his thumb with the hammer four
times. The block of wood was now crammed with flattened
iron nail heads. Quentin groaned soundlessly and let his
head loll back against the hard back of the chair. The door
flew open, and Professor Mayakovsky entered carrying a
jingling tray.
He set the tray down on the desk. It supported a cup of
hot tea, a tumbler of water, a plate with a pat of yeasty
European butter and a thick slab of sourdough bread on it,
and a glass containing what would turn out to be two fingersof peppery vodka, one finger of which Mayakovsky drank
off himself before placing it on the table.
When he was done he slapped Quentin hard across the
face.
“That is for doubting yourself,” he said.
Quentin stared at him. He lifted a hand to his cheek,
thinking: This man is batshit insane. He could do anything
to us out here.
Mayakovsky turned the book back to the first page again.
He turned the piece of paper with the spell on it over and
patted it. On the back was written another spell: Bujold’s
Sorcerous Nail Extraction.
“Begin again, please.”
Wax on, wax off.
When Mayakovsky was gone, Quentin stood up and
stretched. Both his knees cracked. Instead of beginning
again he went over to the tiny window looking out on the
lunar snowfields. The sheer monochromaticity of the
landscape was beginning to make him hallucinate colors.
The sun had not moved at all.
That was how Quentin’s first month at Brakebills South
went. The spells changed, and the Circumstances were
different, but the room was the same, and the days were
always, always, always the same: empty, relentless,
interminable wastelands of repetition. Mayakovsky’s
ominous warnings had been entirely justified, and arguably
a little understated. Even during his worst moments at
Brakebills, Quentin had always had a niggling suspicion
that he was getting away with something by being there,
that the sacrifices asked of him by his instructors, however
great, were cheap by comparison with the rewards of the
life he could look forward to as a magician. At BrakebillsSouth, for the first time, he felt like he was giving value for
money.
And he understood why they’d been sent here. What
Mayakovsky was asking of them was impossible. The
human brain was not meant to ingest these quantities of
information. If Fogg had tried to enforce this regimen back
at Brakebills, there would have been an insurrection.
It was difficult to gauge how the others were holding up.
They met at mealtimes and passed in the hall, but because
of the prohibition against speech there was no
commiserating, just glances and shrugs and not much of
that. Their gazes met bleakly over the breakfast table and
turned away. Eliot’s eyes were empty, and Quentin
supposed his own probably looked the same way. Even
Janet’s animated features were set and frozen. No notes
were exchanged. Whatever enchantment kept them from
talking was global: their pens wouldn’t write.
Quentin was losing interest in communicating anyway.
He should have been ravenous for human contact, but
instead he felt himself falling away from the others, deeper
inside himself. He shuffled like a prisoner from bedroom to
dining room to solitary classroom, down the stone
corridors, under the tediously unblinking gaze of the white
sun. Once he wandered up to the roof of the West Tower
and found one of the others, a gangly extrovert named
Dale, putting on a mime show for a listless audience, but it
really wasn’t worth the effort of turning his head to follow
what was going on. His sense of humor had died in the
vastness.
Professor Mayakovsky seemed to expect this, as if he’d
known it was going to happen. After the first three weeks he
announced that he had lifted the spell that kept them from
talking. The news was received in silence. Nobody had
noticed.
Mayakovsky began to vary the routine. Most days were
still devoted to grinding through the Circumstances and
their never-ending Exceptions, but once in a while heintroduced other exercises. In an empty hall he erected a
three-dimensional maze composed of wire rings through
which the students would levitate objects at speed, to
sharpen their powers of concentration and control. At first
they used marbles, then later steel balls only slightly
narrower than the rings. When a ball brushed a ring a spark
cracked between them, and the spellcaster felt a shock.
Later still they would guide fireflies through the same
maze, influencing their tiny insect minds by force of will.
They watched one another do this in silence, feeling envy at
one another’s successes and contempt for one another’s
failures. The regime had divided them against each other.
Janet in particular was bad at it—she tended to overpower
her fireflies, to the point where they would crisp up in midair
and become puffs of ash. Mayakovsky, stony-faced, just
made her start over, while tears of wordless frustration ran
down her face. This could and did go on for hours. No one
could leave the hall before everyone had completed the
exercise. They slept there more than once.
As the weeks went by, and still no one spoke, they
plowed deeper and deeper into areas of magic Quentin
never thought he’d have the guts to try. They practiced
transformations. He learned to unpack and parse the spell
that had turned them into geese (much of the trick, it turned
out, was in shedding, storing, and then restoring the
difference in body mass). They spent a hilarious afternoon
as polar bears, wandering clumsily in a herd over the
packed snow, swatting harmlessly at each other with giant
yellow paws, encased as they were in layers of fur, hide,
and fat. Their bear bodies felt clumsy and top heavy, and
they kept toppling over sideways onto their backs by
accident. More hilarity.
Nobody liked him, but it became apparent that
Mayakovsky was no fraud. He could do things Quentin had
never seen done at Brakebills, things he didn’t think had
been done for centuries. One afternoon he demonstrated,
but did not allow them to try, a spell that reversed the flow ofentropy. He smashed a glass globe and then neatly
restored it again, like a film clip run in reverse. He popped
a helium balloon and then knitted it back together and
refilled it with its original helium atoms, in some cases
fishing them from deep inside the lungs of spectators who
had inhaled them. He used camphor to smother a spider—
he showed no particular remorse about this—and then,
frowning with the effort, brought the spider back to life.
Quentin watched the poor thing creep around in circles on
the tabletop, hopelessly traumatized, making little dazed
rushes at nothing and then retreating to a corner, hunched
up and twitching, while Mayakovsky moved on to another
topic.
One day, about three months into the semester,
Mayakovsky announced that they would be transforming
into Arctic foxes for the afternoon. It was an odd choice—
they’d already done a few mammals, and it was no tougher
than becoming a goose. But why quibble? Being an Arctic
fox turned out to be a hell of a lot of fun. As soon as the
change was in effect Quentin shot out across the snowpack
on his four twinkling paws. His little fox body was so fast
and light, and his eyes were so close to the ground, that it
was like flying a high-performance jet at low altitude. Tiny
ridges and crumbs of snow loomed up like mountains and
boulders. He leaped over them and dodged around them
and crashed through them. When he tried to turn he was
going so fast he skidded and wiped out in a huge plume of
snow. The rest of the pack gleefully piled on top of him,
yipping and yapping and snapping.
It was an amazing outpouring of collective joy. Quentin
had forgotten he was capable of that emotion, the way a
lost spelunker feels like there never was such a thing as
sunlight, that it was just a cruel fiction. They chased one
another around in circles, panting and rolling and acting like
idiots. It was funny, Quentin thought, with his stupid little
miniature fox brain, the way he could automatically
recognize everybody as foxes. That was Eliot with the
snaggle-teeth. That plump blue-white critter was Josh. Thatsmall, silky specimen with the wide eyes was Alice.
Somewhere in the goofing off a game spontaneously
evolved. It had something to do with pushing around a
chunk of ice with your paws and your nose as fast as
possible. Beyond that the point of the game wasn’t really
clear, but they frantically pounced on the chunk of ice, or
pounced on whoever had pounced on it just before them,
and pushed it until the next person pounced on them.
An Arctic fox’s eyes weren’t all that much to brag about,
but its nose was unbelievable. Quentin’s new nose was a
Goddamned sensory masterpiece. Even in the middle of
the fray he could recognize classmates by snuffing their fur.
Increasingly, Quentin noticed one scent more than the
others. It was a sharp, acrid, skunky musk that probably
would have smelled like cat piss to a human being, but to a
fox it was like a drug. He caught flashes of it in the fray
every few minutes, and every time he did it grabbed his
attention and jerked him around like a fish on a hook.
Something was happening to the game. It was losing its
cohesion. Quen tin was still playing, but fewer and fewer of
his fellow foxes were playing with him. Eliot lit out in a
streak off into the snow dunes. The pack dwindled to ten,
then eight. Where were they going? Quentin’s fox brain
barked. And what the hell was that unbe-fucking-lievable
smell he kept stumbling on? There it was again! This time
he tackled the source of the smell, buried his snuffling
muzzle in her fur, because of course he had known all
along, with what was left of his consciousness, that what he
was smelling was Alice.
It was totally against the rules, but breaking the rules
turned out to be as much fun as obeying them. How had he
never figured that out before? The others were playing
more and more wildly—they weren’t even trying to go after
the chunk of ice anymore—and the game was
disintegrating into little knots of tussling foxes, and he was
tussling with Alice. Vulpine hormones and instincts were
powering up, taking over, manhandling what was left of hisrational human mind.
He locked his teeth in the thick fur of her neck. It didn’t
seem to hurt her any, or at least not in a way that was easily
distinguishable from pleasure. Something crazy and urgent
was going on, and there was no way to stop it, or probably
there was but why would you? Stopping was one of those
pointless, life-defeating human impulses for which his merry
little fox brain had nothing but contempt.
He caught a glimpse of Alice’s wild dark fox’s eye rolling
with terror and then half shutting with pleasure. Their tiny
quick breaths puffed white in the air and mingled and
disappeared. Her white fox fur was coarse and smooth at
the same time, and she made little yipping snarls every
time he pushed himself deeper inside her. He never
wanted to stop.
The snow burned underneath them. It glowed hot like a
bed of coals. They were on fire, and they let the fire
consume them.
To an outside observer breakfast the next day wouldn’t
have looked much different than it usually did. Everybody
shuffled in in their loose-fitting, all-white Brakebills South
uniforms, sat down without speaking or looking at one
another, and ate what was put in front of them. But Quentin
felt like he was walking on the moon. Giant slow-motion
steps, ringing silence, vacuum all around him, a television
audience of millions. He didn’t dare look at anybody else,
least of all Alice.
She was sitting across the table and three people down
from him, impassive and unperturbed, calmly focused on
her oatmeal. He couldn’t have guessed within a light-year
what she was thinking. Though he knew what was on
everybody else’s minds. He was sure they all knew what
had happened. They’d been right out in the open, for God’s
sake. Or had they all been doing the same thing? Dideverybody pair off? His face felt hot. He didn’t even know if
she was a virgin. Or, if she had been whether she still was
one.
It would all be so much simpler if he even understood
what it meant, but he didn’t. Could he be in love with Alice?
He tried to compare what he felt for her with his
remembered feelings for Julia, but the two emotions were
worlds apart. Things just got out of control, that’s all. It
wasn’t them, it was their fox bodies. Nobody had to take it
too seriously.
Mayakovsky sat at the head of the table looking smug.
He had known this was going to happen, Quentin thought
furiously, stabbing at his cheese grits with a fork. A bunch
of teenagers cooped up in the Fortress of Solitude for two
months, then stuck in the bodies of stupid horny animals. Of
course we were going to go crazy.
Whatever perverted personal satisfaction Mayakovsky
got out of what happened, it became obvious over the next
week that it was also a practical piece of personnel
management, because Quentin reapplied himself to his
magical studies with the laserlike focus of a person
desperate to avoid meeting anybody else’s eyes or
thinking about things that actually mattered, like how he
really felt about Alice, and who it was who had had sex with
her out on the ice, him or the fox. It was back to the grind,
pounding his way through Circumstances and Exceptions
and a thousand mnemonics designed to force him to
embed a thousand trivial particles of data in the soft tissue
of his already supersaturated mind.
They fell into a collective tribal trance. The depleted
palette of the Antarctic world hypnotized them. The shifting
snows outside briefly revealed a low ridge of dark shale,
the only topographical feature in a featureless world, and
the students watched it from the roof like television. It
reminded him of the desert in The Wandering Dune —God,
he hadn’t thought about Fillory for ages. Quentin wondered
if the rest of the world, his life before this, had just been alurid dream. When he pictured the globe now it was entirely
Antarctic, a whole world over which this monochromatic
continent had metastasized like an icy cancer.
He went a little insane. They all did, though it took them in
different ways. Some of the others became obsessed with
sex. Their higher functions were so numb and exhausted
they became animals, desperate for any kind of contact
that wouldn’t ask words of them. Impromptu orgies were not
unheard of. Quentin came upon them once or twice in the
evenings—they would gather in apparently arbitrary
combinations, in an empty classroom or in somebody’s
bedroom, in semi-anonymous chains, their white uniforms
half or all the way off, their eyes glassy and bored as they
pulled and stroked and pumped, always in silence. He saw
Janet take part once. The display was as much for other
people as for themselves, but Quentin never joined in or
even watched, just turned away, feeling superior and also
strangely angry. Maybe he was just angry that something
kept him from jumping in. He was disproportionately
relieved that he never saw Alice there.
Time passed, or at least Quentin knew that, according to
theory, it pretty much had to be passing, though he didn’t
personally see much evidence of it, unless you counted the
weird menagerie of mustaches and beards he and his
male classmates were growing. However much he ate he
got thinner and thinner. His state of mind devolved from
mesmerized to hallucinatory. Tiny random things became
charged with overwhelming significance—a round pebble,
a stray straw from a broom, a dark mark on a white wall—
that dissipated again minutes later. In the classroom he
sometimes saw fantastical creatures mixed in with his
classmates—a huge, elegant brown stick insect that clung
to the back of a chair; a giant lizard with horny skin and a
German accent, whose head burned with white fire—
though afterward he could never be sure if he had imagined
them. Once he thought he saw the man whose face was
hidden by a branch. He couldn’t take this much longer.
Then, just like that, one morning over breakfastMayakovsky announced that there were two weeks
remaining in the semester, and it was time they gave
serious thought to the final exam. The test was simply this:
they would walk from Brakebills South to the South Pole.
The distance was on the order of five hundred miles. They
would be given no food and no maps and no clothing. They
would have to protect and sustain themselves by magic.
Flying was out of bounds—they would go on foot or not at
all, and in the form of human beings, not as bears or
penguins or some other naturally cold-resistant animal.
Cooperation between students was prohibited—they could
view it as a race, if they liked. There was no time limit. The
exam was not mandatory.
Two weeks wasn’t quite long enough to prepare properly,
but it was more than long enough for the decision to hang
over them. Yes or no, in or out? Mayakovsky stressed that
safety precautions would be minimal. He would do his best
to keep track of them in the field, but there was no
guarantee that if they screwed up he’d be able to rescue
their sorry, hypothermic asses.
There was a lot to study up on. Would sunburn be a
problem? Snow blindness? Should they toughen the soles
of their feet or try to create some kind of magical footwear?
Was there any way to get mutton fat, which they could need
to cast Chkhartishvili’s Enveloping Warmth, from the
kitchen? And if the test wasn’t even mandatory, then what
was the point of it? What would happen if they failed? It
sounded more like a ritual or a hazing than a final exam.
On the last morning Quentin got up early with the idea of
foraging for contraband spell components in the kitchen. He
had made up his mind to compete. He had to know if he
could do it or not. It was that simple.
Most of the cupboards were locked—he probably wasn’t
the first student to have thought of it—but he did manage toload up his pockets with flour and a stray silver fork and
some old sprouting garlic cloves that might come in handy
for something, he didn’t know what. He headed downstairs.
Alice was waiting for him on the landing between floors.
“I have to ask you something,” she said, her voice full of
crisp determination. “Are you in love with me? It’s okay if
you aren’t, I just want to know.”
She made it almost all the way through, but she couldn’t
quite say the last phrase full voice and whispered it instead.
He hadn’t even met her eyes since the afternoon they’d
been foxes together. Three weeks at least. Now they stood
together on the smooth, freezing stone floor, abjectly
human. How could a person who hadn’t washed or cut her
hair in five months be so beautiful?
“I don’t know,” he said. His voice was scratchy from lack
of use. The words felt more frightening than any spell he
had ever cast. “I mean, you’d think I would, but I don’t. I
really don’t know.”
He tried to make his tone light and conversational, but his
body felt heavy. The floor was accelerating rapidly upward
with both of them on it. At that moment, when he should
have been most lucidly present, he had no idea whether he
was lying or telling the truth. With all the time he’d spent
studying here, everything he’d learned, why hadn’t he
learned this one thing? He was failing both of them, himself
and Alice.
“It’s okay,” she said, with a quick little smile that strained
the ligaments that held Quentin’s heart in his chest. “I didn’t
think so. I was more wondering whether you would lie about
it.”
He was lost. “Was I supposed to lie?”
“It’s okay, Quentin. It was nice. The sex, I mean. You do
realize it’s all right to have nice things sometimes, right?”
She saved him from having to answer by standing up ontiptoe and kissing him softly on the lips. Her lips were dry
and chapped, but the tip of her tongue was soft and warm. It
felt like the last warm thing in the world.
“Try not to die,” she said.
She patted his rough cheek and disappeared down the
stairs ahead of him in the predawn twilight.
After that ordeal the test was almost an afterthought. They
were released separately out onto the snowpack, at
intervals, to discourage collaboration. Mayakovsky made
Quentin disrobe first—so much for the flour and the garlic
and that bent silver fork—and walk naked out beyond the
range of the protective spells that kept the temperature
bearable at Brakebills South. As he passed through the
invisible perimeter the cold hit him face-first, and it was
beyond all belief. Quentin’s whole body spasmed and
contracted. It felt like he’d been dropped into burning
kerosene. The air seared his lungs. He bent over, hands
jammed in his armpits.
“Happy trails,” Mayakovsky called. He tossed Quentin a
Ziploc bag full of something gray and greasy. Mutton fat.
“Bog s’vami.”
Whatever. Quentin knew he had only a few seconds
before his fingers would be too numb for spellcasting. He
tore open the bag and jammed his hands inside and
stuttered out Chkhartishvili’s Enveloping Warmth. It got
easier after that. He layered on the rest of the spells by
turns: protection from the wind and the sun, speed, strong
legs, toughened feet. He threw up a navigation spell, and a
great luminous golden compass wheel that only he could
see appeared overhead in the white sky.
Quentin knew the theory behind the spells, but he’d never
tested them all together at full strength. He felt like a
superhero. He felt bionic. He was in business.He turned to face the S on the compass wheel and
trotted off toward the horizon at speed, circling around the
building he’d just left, bare feet fluffing silently through bone-
dry powder. With the strength spells in place his thighs felt
like pneumatic pistons. His calves were steel truck springs.
His feet were as tough and numb as Kevlar brake shoes.
Afterward he remembered almost nothing of the week
that followed. The whole thing was very clinical. Reduced to
its technical essence, it was a problem of resource
management, of nurturing and guarding and fanning the
little flickering flame of life and consciousness within his
body as the entire continent of Antarctica tried to leach
away the heat and sugar and water that kept it burning.
He slept lightly and very little. His urine turned a deep
amber then ceased to flow entirely. The monotony of the
scenery was relentless. Each low crunchy ridge he topped
revealed a vista composed of its identical clones, arranged
in a pattern of infinite regress. His thoughts went around in
circles. He lost track of time. He sang the Oscar Mayer
jingle and the Simpsons theme song. He talked to James
and Julia. Sometimes he confused James with Martin
Chatwin and Julia with Jane. The fat melted out of his body;
his ribs grew more prominent, tried to push their way out
through his skin. He had to be careful. His margin of error
was not large. The spells he was using were powerful and
highly durable, with a life of their own. He could die out
here, and his corpse would probably keep jogging merrily
along toward the pole on its own.
Once or twice a day, sometimes more, a lipless blue
crevasse would open beneath his feet, and he would have
to trot around it or cross it with a magic-assisted leap.
Once he stumbled right into one and fell forty feet down into
blue-tinted darkness. The ward-and-shield spells around
his pale, nude body were so thick that he barely noticed. He
just ground to a slow stop, jammed in between two rough
ice walls, and then lifted himself back out again, like the
Lorax, and kept on running.Even as his physical strength faded he leaned on the iron
magical vigor that his sojourn under Professor Mayakovsky
had given him. It no longer felt like a fluke when he worked
magic successfully. The worlds of magical and physical
reality felt equally real and present to him. He summoned
simple spells into being without conscious thought. He
reached for the magical force within him as naturally as he
would reach for the salt on the dinner table. He had even
gained the ability to extemporize a little, to guess at
magical Circumstances when he hadn’t been drilled on
them. The implications of this were stunning: magic wasn’t
simply random, it had an actual shape—a fractal, chaotic
shape, but subconsciously his blindly groping mental
fingertips had begun to parse it.
He remembered a lecture Mayakovsky had given a few
weeks before, which at the time he hadn’t paid much
attention to. Now, however, jogging forever south across
the frozen, broken plains, it came back to him almost word
for word.
“You dislike me,” Mayakovsky had begun. “You are sick
of the sight of me, skraelings. ” That was what he called
them, skraelings. Apparently it was a Viking word that
meant, roughly, “wretches.”
“But if you listen to me only one more time in your lives,
listen to me now. Once you reach a certain level of fluency
as a spellcaster, you will begin to manipulate reality freely.
Not all of you—Dale, I think you in particular are unlikely to
cross that Rubicon. But for some of you spells will one day
come very easily, almost automatically, with very little in the
way of conscious effort.
“When the change comes, I ask only that you know it for
what it is, and be aware. For the true magician there is no
very clear line between what lies inside the mind and what
lies outside it. If you desire something, it will become
substance. If you despise it, you will see it destroyed. A
master magician is not much different from a child or a
madman in that respect. It takes a very clear head and avery strong will to operate once you are in that place. And
you will find out very quickly whether or not you have that
clarity and that strength.”
Mayakovsky stared out at their silent faces a moment
longer, with undisguised disgust, then stepped down from
the lectern. “Age,” Quentin heard him mutter. “It’s wasted on
the young. Just like youth.”
When night finally fell the stars burned shrilly overhead
with impossible force and beauty. Quentin jogged with his
head up, knees high, no longer feeling anything below his
waist, gloriously isolated, lost in the spectacle. He became
nothing, a running wraith, a wisp of warm flesh in a silent
universe of midnight frost.
Once, for a few minutes, the darkness was disturbed by
a flickering on the horizon. He realized it must be another
student, another skraeling like himself, moving on a parallel
path but way off to the east, twenty or thirty miles at least,
and ahead of him. He thought about changing course to
make contact. But seriously, what was the point? Should he
risk getting busted for collaborating, just to say hi? What
did he, a wraith, a wisp of warm flesh, need with anybody
else?
Whoever it was, he thought dispassionately, was using a
different set of spells than he was. He couldn’t piece out the
magic at this distance, but they were throwing off a whole
lot of pale pink-white light.
Inefficient, he thought. Inelegant.
When the sun rose he lost sight of the other student
again.
Some immeasurable period of time later, Quentin blinked.
He had lost the habit of closing his magically
weatherproofed eyes, but something was bothering him. Itwas a matter for concern, though he could barely formulate
why in any conscious, coherent way. There was a black
spot in his vision.
The landscape had, if anything, gotten more
monotonous. Far behind him were the moments when
streaks of dark frozen schist occasionally marred the white
snow. Once he’d passed what he was fairly sure was a
fallen meteorite stuck in the ice, a lump of something black,
like a lost charcoal briquette. But that was a long time ago.
He was far gone. After days without real sleep his mind
was a machine for monitoring spells and moving his feet,
nothing else. But while he was checking off anomalies,
there was something screwy going on with his compass
wheel, too. It wobbled erratically, and it was getting kind of
distorted. The N had grown vast and swollen; it was taking
up five-sixths of the circle, and the other directions had
withered away to almost nothing. The S he was supposed to
be following had shrunk to a tiny squiggle in microscopic
jewel type.
The black spot was taller than it was wide, and it bobbed
up and down with his stride the way an external object
would. So it wasn’t corneal damage. And it was growing
larger and larger, too. It was Mayakovsky, stand ing by
himself in the powdery nothingness, holding a blanket. He
must be at the pole. Quentin had completely forgotten
where he was going or why.
When he got close enough Mayakovsky caught him. The
tall man grunted, wrapping the heavy, scratchy blanket
around him, and swung him down to the snow. Quentin’s
legs kept moving for a few seconds, then he lay still,
panting, on his side, twitching like a netted fish. It was the
first time in nine days that he’d stopped running. The sky
spun. He retched.
Mayakovsky stood over him.
“ Molodyetz, Quentin. Good man. Good man. You made
it. You are going home.”There was something odd in Mayakovsky’s voice. The
sneer was gone, and it was thick with emotion. A twisted
smile revealed for a moment the older wizard’s yellow teeth
in his unshaven face. He hauled Quentin to his feet with one
hand; the other hand he flourished, and a portal appeared
in the air. He shoved Quentin unceremoniously through it.
Quentin staggered and fell into a psychedelic riot of
green that assaulted him so violently that at first he didn’t
recognize it as the rear terrace of Brakebills on a hot
summer day. After the blankness of the polar ice the
campus was a hallucinatory swirl of sound and color and
warmth. He squeezed his eyes tight shut. He was home.
He rolled over on his back on the baking smooth stone.
Birds sang deafeningly. He opened his eyes. A sight even
stranger than the trees and the grass met them: looking
back through the portal, he could still see the tall, soft-
shouldered magician standing there with Antarctica in the
background. Snow kicked up around him. A few stray
crystals drifted through and evaporated in midflight. It
looked like a painting executed on an oval panel and hung
in midair. But the magical window was already closing. He
must be preparing himself to go back to his empty polar
mansion, Quentin thought. He waved, but Mayakovsky
wasn’t looking at him. He was looking out at the Maze and
the rest of the Brakebills campus. The unguarded longing
on his face was so excruciating Quentin had to look away.
Then the portal closed. It was over. It was late May, and
the air was full of pollen. After the rarefied atmosphere of
Antarctica it tasted hot and thick as soup. It was a lot like
that first day he’d come to Brakebills, straight through from
that frigid Brooklyn afternoon. The sun beat down. He
sneezed.
They were all waiting for him, or almost all: Eliot and Josh
and Janet, at least, wearing their old school uniforms,
looking fat and happy and relaxed and none the worse for
wear, like they’d done nothing for the past six months but sit
on their asses and eat grilled cheese sandwiches.“Welcome back,” Eliot said. He was munching a yellow
pear. “They only told us ten minutes ago you might be
coming through.”
“Wow.” Josh’s eyes were round. “Man, you look skinny.
Wizard needs food badly. And also maybe a shower.”
Quentin knew he had only a minute or two before he burst
into tears and passed out. He still had Mayakovsky’s
scratchy wool blanket wrapped around him. He looked
down at his pale, frozen feet. Nothing looked frostbitten,
anyway, though one of his toes was sticking out at an angle.
It didn’t hurt yet.
It was very, very comfortable, deliriously comfortable,
lying on his back on the hot stone like this, with the others
looking down at him. He knew he should probably get up,
for the sake of politeness if for no other reason, but he
didn’t feel like moving yet. He thought he might just stay
where he was for another minute. He had earned himself a
rest.
“Are you all right?” Josh said. “What was it like?”
“Alice kicked your ass,” Janet said. “She got back two
days ago. She already went home.”
“You were out there a week and a half,” Eliot said. “We
were worried about you.”
Why did they keep talking? If he could just gaze up at
them in silence, that would be perfect. Just look at them and
listen to the chirping birds and feel the warm flagstones
holding him up. And maybe somebody could get him a
glass of water, he was desperately thirsty. He tried to
articulate this last sentiment, but his throat was dry and
cracked. He wound up just making a tiny creaking noise.
“Oh, I think he wants to know about us,” Janet said. She
took a bite of Eliot’s pear. “Yeah, nobody else went out but
you two. What—you think we’re stupid?”ALICE
Quentin didn’t spend any time in Brooklyn that summer
because his parents didn’t live there anymore. Abruptly and
without consulting him, they’d sold off their Park Slope town
house for a colossal sum and semiretired to a faux-Colonial
McMansion in a placid suburb of Boston called Chesterton,
where Quentin’s mother could paint full time and his father
could do God only knew what.
The shock of being severed from the place he grew up in
was all the more surprising because it never really came.
Quentin looked for the part of him that should have missed
his old neighborhood, but it wasn’t there. He supposed he
must have been shedding his old identity and his old life all
along, without noticing it. This just made the cut cleaner and
neater. Really, it was probably easier this way. Not that his
parents had made the move out of kindness, or any logic
other than the obvious financial one.
The Chesterton house was yellow with green shutters
and sat on an acre so aggressively landscaped that it
looked like a virtual representation of itself. Though it was
trimmed and detailed in a vaguely Colonial style, it was so
enormous—bulging in all directions with extra wings and
gables and roofs—that it looked like it had been inflated
rather than constructed. Huge cement air-conditioning
bunkers hummed outside night and day. It was even more
unreal than the real world usually was.
When Quentin arrived home for summer vacation—
Brakebills summer, September for the rest of the world—
his parents were alarmed at his gaunt appearance, his
hollow, shell-shocked eyes, his haunted demeanor. But
their curiosity about him was, as always, mild enough to be
easily manageable, and he started gaining weight back
quickly with the help of their massive, ever-full suburban
refrigerator.At first it was a relief just to be warm all the time, and to
sleep in every day, and to be free of Mayakovsky and the
Circumstances and that merciless white winter light. But
after seventy-two hours Quentin was already bored again.
In Antarctica he’d fantasized about having nothing to do
except lie on his bed and sleep and stare into space, but
now those empty hours were here, and they were getting
old amazingly fast. The long silences at Brakebills South
had made him impatient with small talk. He had no interest
in TV anymore—it looked like an electronic puppet show to
him, an artificial version of an imitation world that meant
nothing to him anyway. Real life—or was it fantasy life?
whichever one Brakebills was—that was what mattered,
and that was happening somewhere else.
As he usually did when he was stuck at home, he went on
a Fillory binge. The old 1970s-era covers looked more and
more dated every time he saw them, with their psychedelic
Yellow Submarine palette, and on a couple of them the
covers had come off completely and been tucked back
between the pages as bookmarks. But the world inside the
books was as fresh and vital as ever, unfaded and
unironized by time. Quentin had never before really
appreciated the cleverness of the second book. The Girl
Who Told Time, in which Rupert and Helen are abruptly
shanghaied into Fillory straight out of their respective
boarding schools, the only time the Chatwins cross over in
winter instead of summer. They end up back in an earlier
time period, one that overlaps with the storyline of the first
book. With the aid of foreknowledge, Rupert dogs Martin’s
and Helen’s footsteps—the earlier Helen’s—as they repeat
the action of The World in the Walls, note for note. He
keeps just out of view, dropping clues and helping them out
without their knowledge (the mysterious character known
only as the Wood One turns out to have been Rupert in
disguise); Quentin wondered if Plover wrote The Girl Who
Told Time just to shore up all the plot holes in The World in
the Walls .
Meanwhile Helen embarks on a hunt for the mysteriousQuesting Beast of Fillory, which according to legend can’t
be caught, but if you do catch it—all logic aside—it’s
supposed to give you your heart’s desire. The Beast leads
her on a tricksy, circuitous chase that somehow winds in
and out of the enchanted tapestries that adorn the library of
Castle Whitespire. She only ever catches a glimpse of it,
peeking coyly out at her from behind an embroidered shrub
before vanishing in a flicker of cloven hoofs.
At the end the twin rams Ember and Umber show up as
usual, like a pair of sinister ruminant constables. They were
a force for good, of course, but there was a slightly
Orwellian quality to their oversight of Fillory: they knew
everything that went on, and there was no obvious limit to
their powers, but they rarely bestirred themselves to actively
intervene on behalf of the creatures in their charge. Mostly
they just scolded everybody involved for the mess they’d
made, finishing each other’s sentences, then made
everyone renew their vows of fealty before wandering away
to crop some luckless farmer’s alfalfa fields. They firmly
usher Rupert and Helen back into the real world, back into
the damp, chilly, dark-wood-paneled halls of their boarding
schools, as if they had never left it.
Quentin even plowed through The Wandering Dune, the
fifth and last book in the series (that is, the last as far as
anybody but Quentin knew) and not a fan favorite. It was
longer by half than any of the other books and starred Helen
and the youngest Chatwin, clever, introverted Jane. The
tone of The Wandering Dune is different from earlier
books: having spent the last two volumes searching
fruitlessly for their vanished brother, Martin, the Chatwins’
usual cheery English indomitability has been tempered by a
wistful mood. On entering Fillory the two girls encounter a
mysterious sand dune being blown through the kingdom, all
by itself. They climb the dune and find themselves riding it
through the green Fillorian countryside and on out into a
dreamy desert wasteland in the far south, where they spend
most of the rest of the book.Almost nothing happens. Jane and Helen fill up the
pages with interminable conversations about right and
wrong and teenage Christian metaphysics and whether
their true obligations lie on Earth or in Fillory. Jane is
desperately worried about Martin but also, like Quentin, a
little jealous: whatever iron law kept the Chatwins from
staying in Fillory forever, he had found a loophole, or it had
found him. Alive or dead, he had managed to overstay his
tourist visa.
But Helen, who has a scoldy streak, heaps scorn on
Martin—she thinks he’s just hiding in Fillory so he won’t
have to go home. He’s the child who doesn’t want to leave
the playground, or who won’t go to bed. He’s Peter Pan.
Why can’t he grow up and face the real world? She calls
him selfish, self-indulgent, “the biggest baby of us all.”
In the end the sisters are picked up by a majestic clipper
ship that sails through the sand as if it were water. The ship
is crewed by large bunnies who would be overly cutesy (the
Wandering Dune -haters always compared them to Ewoks)
if it weren’t for their impressively hard-assed attention to the
technical details of operating their complex vessel.
The bunnies leave Jane and Helen with a gift, a set of
magical buttons they can use to zap themselves from Earth
to Fillory and back at will. On returning to England, Helen, in
a fit of self-righteousness, promptly hides the buttons and
won’t tell Jane where they are, upon which Jane excoriates
her in fine period vernacular and turns the entire household
upside down and inside out. But she never finds the
buttons, and on that unsatisfying note the book, and the
whole series, ends.
Even if it didn’t turn out to be the final book in the series,
Quentin wondered where Plover could possibly have gone
with the story in The Magicians . For one thing he was out
of Chatwins: the books always featured two Chatwin
children, an older one from the previous book and a new,
younger one. But pretty, dark-haired Jane was the last and
youngest Chatwin. Would she have gone back to Filloryalone? It broke the pattern.
For another, half of the fun of the books was waiting for
the Chatwins to find their way into Fillory, for the magic door
that opens for them and them only to appear. You always
knew it would, and it always surprised you when it did. But
with the buttons you could shuttle back and forth at will.
Where was the miracle in that? Maybe that was why Helen
hid them. They might as well have built a subway to Fillory.
Quentin’s conversations with his parents were so circular
and self-defeating, they sounded like experimental theater.
In the mornings he lay in bed as long as he could stand it, in
an attempt to avoid breakfast with them, but they always
waited him out. He couldn’t win: they had even less to do
than he did. Sometimes he wondered if it was a perverse
game they played, that they were in on and he wasn’t.
He would come down to find them sitting at a table
littered with crusts and crumbs and clementine peels and
cereal bowls. While he pretended to be interested in the
Chesterton Chestnut, he would furiously search for some
even remotely plausible topic of conversation:
“So. Are you guys still going on that trip to South
America?”
“South America?” His dad looked up, startled, as if he’d
forgotten Quentin was there.
“Aren’t you going to South America?”
A look passed between Quentin’s parents.
“Spain. We’re going to Spain and Portugal.”
“Oh, Portugal. Right. I was thinking Peru for some
reason.”
“Spain and Portugal. It’s for your mother. There’s an
artists’ exchange with the university in Lisbon. Then we’regoing to take a boat trip down the Tigris.”
“ Tagus, darling!” Quentin’s mother said, with her tinkling
I-married-an-idiot! laugh. “The Tagus! The Tigris is in Iraq.”
She bit into a piece of raisin toast with her large straight
teeth.
“Well, I don’t think we’ll be sailing down the Tigris anytime
soon!” Quentin’s father laughed loudly at this, exactly as if it
were funny, and then paused for thought. “Darling, do you
remember that week we spent in a houseboat on the Volga
. . . ?”
An extended Russian reminiscence followed, a duet
punctuated by significant silences that Quentin interpreted
as allusions to sexual activities that he didn’t want to know
about. It was enough to make you envy the Chatwins, with
Dad in the army and Mum in the madhouse. Mayakovsky
would have known what to do with this kind of conversation.
He would have silenced it. He wondered how hard that spell
was to learn.
By about eleven every morning Quentin would hit his limit
and flee the house for the relative safety of Chesterton,
which stubbornly refused to reveal even the slightest hint of
mystery or intrigue beneath its green, self-satisfied exterior.
He had never learned to drive, so he rode his father’s white
1970s-era ten-speed, which weighed approximately one
metric ton, to the center of town. Out of deference to its
glorious Colonial heritage the town was governed by a set
of draconian zoning laws that kept everything in a state of
permanent unnatural quaintness.
Knowing no one, caring about nothing, Quentin took a
tour of the low-ceilinged, heavy-timbered residence of
some Revolutionary luminary. He inspected a boxy white-
painted Unitarian church, est. 1766. He surveyed the lush
flat lawns where amateur Continental irregulars had faced
off against well-drilled, well-armed Redcoats, with
predictable results. There was one pleasant surprise,
hidden behind the church: a lovely half-vanishedseventeenth-century graveyard, a little square glebe of ultra-
green grass scattered with wet saffron-colored elm leaves,
with a bent wrought-iron fence around it. Inside, it was cool
and hushed.
The gravestones were all winged skulls and bad
devotional quatrains about whole families carried off by
fever, weathered in places into illegibility. Quentin crouched
down on the wet grass to try to decipher one very old one, a
rectangle of blue slate that had split in half and sunk halfway
into the green turf, which rose up to meet it like a wave.
“Quentin.”
He straightened up. A woman about his age had come in
through the cemetery gate.
“Hi?” he said cautiously. How did she know his name?
“I guess you didn’t think I would find you,” she said
unsteadily. “I guess you didn’t think of that.”
She walked right up to him. At the last possible moment,
too late to do anything about it, he realized that she wasn’t
going to stop. Without breaking stride she grabbed the
front of his barn jacket and marched him stumbling
backward over a low footstone right into the aromatic
branches of a cypress tree. Her face, pushed right up in
front of his, dangerously close, was an angry mask. It had
been raining off and on all afternoon, and the needles were
damp.
He resisted the impulse to struggle. He wasn’t going to
be caught fighting a girl in a churchyard.
“Whoa, whoa, whoa!” he said. “Stop. Just stop.”
“Now I’m here,” she said, clinging precariously to her
composure, “now I’m here, and we are going to talk. You
are going to deal with me.”
Now that he had a closer look at her he could see she
was covered in warning signs. Her whole body screamed
unbalance. She was too pale and too thin. Her eyes weretoo wild. Her long dark hair was lank and smelled
unwashed. She was dressed in a raggedy goth outfit—her
arms were wrapped in what looked like black electrical
tape. There were scabby red scratches on the backs of her
hands.
He almost didn’t recognize her.
“I was there, and you were there,” Julia said, locking eyes
with him. “Weren’t you. In that place. That school, or
whatever it was. You got in, didn’t you?”
He got it then. She had been at the Exam after all, he
hadn’t been mistaken, but she hadn’t made the cut. They’d
culled her in the first round, during the written test.
But this was all wrong. It wasn’t supposed to happen,
there were safeguards against it. Anybody who flunked the
Exam was supposed to have their memory gently, lovingly
clouded by a faculty member and then overwritten with a
plausible alibi. It wasn’t simple, nor was it outrageously
ethical, but the spells were humane and well understood.
Except in her case they hadn’t worked, or not completely.
“Julia,” he said. Their faces were very close together.
There was nicotine on her breath. “Julia, what are you doing
here?”
“Don’t pretend with me, don’t you dare pretend! You go
to that school, don’t you? The magic school?”
Quentin kept his face blank. It was a basic rule at
Brakebills not to discuss the school with outsiders. He
could get expelled. But whatever, if Fogg screwed up the
memory spells it wasn’t Quentin’s problem. And this was
Julia. Her lovely freckly face, so close to his, looked much
older. Her skin was blotchy. She was in agony.
“All right,” he said. “Okay. Sure. I go there.”
“I knew it!” she shrieked. She stamped her booted foot
on the graveyard grass. From her reaction he guessed that
she’d been at least halfway bluffing. “I knew it was real, Iknew it was real,” she said, mostly to herself. “I knew it
wasn’t a dream!” She bent over, with her hands over her
face, and one convulsive sob escaped her.
Quentin took a deep breath. He readjusted his jacket.
“Listen,” he said gently. She was still doubled over. He
bent down, putting a hand on her narrow back. “Julia.
You’re not supposed to remember any of that stuff. They’re
supposed to make you forget if you don’t get in.”
“But I should have!” She straightened up with the flashing
red eyes and cold crystal seriousness of the true nutjob. “I
was supposed to get in. I know I was. It was a mistake.
Believe me, it was.” Her large eyes tried to burn into his.
“I’m like you, I can do real magic. I’m like you. See? That’s
why they couldn’t make me forget.”
Quentin saw. He could see everything. No wonder she’d
been so altered the last time he saw her. That one glimpse
through the curtain, of the world behind the world, had
knocked her completely out of orbit. She’d seen it once,
and she couldn’t let go. Brakebills had ruined her.
There was a time when he would have done anything for
her. And he still would, he just didn’t know what to do. Why
did he feel so guilty? He took a deep breath.
“But that’s not how it works. Even if you really can do
magic, that wouldn’t make you any more resistant to
memory spells than anybody else.”
She was staring at him hungrily. Everything he was
saying just confirmed what she wanted to believe: that
magic was real. He backed away, just to put some distance
between them, but she grabbed his sleeve.
“Oh, no-no-no-no-no,” she said with a brittle smile. “Q.
Please. Wait. No. You’re going to help me. That’s why I
came here.”
She had dyed her hair black. It looked dry and burnt.
“Julia, I want to. I just don’t know what I can do.”“Just watch this. Watch.”
She let go of his arm, reluctantly, as if she expected him
to vanish or run away the instant she did. Incredibly, Julia
launched into a basically correct version of a simple
Basque optical spell called Ugarte’s Prismatic Spray.
She must have found it online. Some genuine magical
information did circulate in the straight world, mostly on the
Internet, though it was buried in so much bogus crap that
nobody could tease out the real stuff, even if they could
have used it. Quentin had even seen a Brakebills blazer for
sale on eBay. It was extremely rare, but not unheard of, for
civilians to work up a spell or two on their own, but as far as
Quentin knew they never got into anything serious. Real
magicians called them hedge witches. A few of them had
careers as stage magicians, or set themselves up as cult
demi-deities, gathering around themselves congregations
of Wiccans and Satanists and oddball Christian outliers.
Julia proclaimed the words of the spell theatrically,
overarticulating like she was doing summer-stock
Shakespeare. She had no idea what she was doing.
Quentin glanced nervously at the doorway at the back of the
church.
“Look!” She held up her hand defiantly. The spell had
actually worked, sort of. Her bitten-down fingertips left faint
radiant rainbow trails in the air. She waved them around,
making mystical gestures like an interpretive dancer.
Ugarte’s Prismatic Spray was a totally useless spell.
Quentin felt a pang when he thought about how many
months, if not years, it must have cost her to figure it out.
“See?” she demanded, close to tears. “You see it too,
right? It’s not too late for me. I won’t go back to college. Tell
them. Tell them I could still come.”
“Does James know?”
She shook her head tightly. “He wouldn’t understand. I
don’t see him anymore.”He wanted to help her, but there was no way to. It was far,
far too late. Better to be blunt about it. This could have been
me, he thought. This was almost me.
“I don’t think there’s anything I can do,” he said. “It’s not
up to me. I’ve never heard of them changing their minds—
no one ever gets a second Exam.”
But Alice got an Exam, he thought, even though she
wasn’t Invited.
“You could tell them, though. You can’t decide, but you
can tell them I’m here, right? That I’m still out here? You can
at least do that!”
She grabbed his arm again, and he had to mutter a quick
counterspell to snuff out the Prismatic Spray. That stuff
could eat into fabric.
“Just tell them you saw me,” she said urgently, her eyes
full of dying hope. “Please. I’ve been practicing. You can
teach me. I’ll be your apprentice. I’ll do whatever you need. I
have an aunt who lives in Winchester, I can live with her.
“Or what do you need, Quentin?” She moved closer to
him, just slightly, so that her knee touched his knee. In spite
of himself he felt the old electrical field form between them.
She hazarded a curvy, sardonic smile, letting the moment
hang in the air. “Maybe we can help each other. You used
to want my help.”
He was angry at himself for being tempted. He was angry
at the world for being this way. He wanted to yell
obscenities. It would have been terrible to see anybody
scrape the bottom like this, but her . . . it should have been
anybody but her. She has already seen more unhappiness,
Quentin thought, than I will ever see in my life.
“Listen to me,” he said. “Julia. If I tell them, they’re just
going to find you and wipe your memory. For real this time.”
“They can try,” she snarled, suddenly fierce. “They tried
once already.”She breathed hard through pinched white nostrils.
“Just tell me where it is. Where we were. I’ve been
looking for it. Just tell me where the school is, and I’ll leave
you alone.”
Quentin could only imagine the kind of shit he’d be in if
Julia showed up at the House hell-bent on matriculating and
dropped his name.
“It’s in upstate New York. On the Hudson somewhere, I
don’t know exactly where. I really don’t. It’s near West Point.
They make it invisible. Even I don’t know how to find it. But
I’ll tell them about you, if that’s truly what you want.”
He was just making it worse. Maybe he should have
bluffed her after all, he thought. Tried harder to lie. Too late.
She put her arms around him, as if she were too
exhausted by relief and despair to stand anymore, and he
held her. There was a time when this was everything he
wanted.
“They couldn’t make me forget,” she whispered into his
chest. “Do you understand that? They couldn’t make me
forget.”
He could feel her heart beating, and the word he heard
when it beat was shame, shame, shame. He wondered
why they hadn’t taken her. If anybody should have gone to
Brakebills, it was her, not him. But they really would wipe
her memory, he thought. Fogg would make sure this time.
She’d be happier that way anyway. She could get back on
track, go back to college, get back together with James,
get on with her life. It would all be for the best.
By next morning he was back at Brakebills. The others
were already there; they were surprised he’d lasted as long
as he did. The most any of them had spent at home was
forty-eight hours. Eliot hadn’t gone home at all.It was cool and quiet in the Cottage. Quentin felt safe
again. He was back where he belonged. Eliot was in the
kitchen with a dozen eggs and a bottle of brandy, trying to
make flips, which nobody wanted but which he was
determined to make anyway. Josh and Janet were playing
an idiotic card game called Push—it was basically the
magical equivalent of War—that was wildly popular at
Brakebills. Quentin just used it as a chance to show off his
card-handling skills, which was why nobody ever wanted to
play with him anymore.
While they played Janet told the story of Alice’s Antarctic
ordeal, despite the fact that everybody except Quentin had
heard it already, and Alice herself was right there in the
room, silently paging through an old herbal in the window
seat. Quentin didn’t know how he would feel about seeing
Alice again, after he’d made such a comprehensive mess
of their last conversation, but to his amazed relief, and
despite every possible reason to the contrary, it wasn’t
awkward at all. It was perfect. His heart clenched with silent
happiness when he saw her.
“And then when Mayakovsky tried to give her the bag of
sheep fat, she threw it back in his face!”
“I meant to hand it back to him,” Alice said quietly from
the window seat. “But it was so cold and I was shaking so
badly, I sort of flung it at him. He was all ‘chyort vozmi!’ ”
“Why didn’t you just take it?”
“I don’t know.” She put the book down. “I’d made all these
plans for getting by without it, it just threw me off. Plus I
wanted him to stop looking at me naked. And anyway I
didn’t know he was going to have mutton fat for us. I hadn’t
even prepared the Chkhartishvili.”
That was a white lie. Like Alice couldn’t have cast
Chkhartishvili cold. He had missed her so much.
“So what did you do for heat?” he said.
“I tried using some of those German thermogenesischarms, but they kept fading away whenever I fell asleep.
By the second night I was waking myself up every fifteen
minutes just to make sure I was still alive. By the third day I
was losing my mind. So I ended up using a tweaked Miller
Flare.”
“I don’t get it.” Josh frowned. “How is that supposed to
help?”
“If you kind of mangle it a little it becomes inefficient. The
extra energy comes out as heat instead of light.”
“You know you could have cooked yourself by accident?”
Janet said.
“I know. But when I realized the German thing wasn’t
going to work, I couldn’t think of anything else.”
“I think I saw you once,” Quentin said quietly. “At night.”
“You couldn’t have missed me. I looked like a road flare.”
“A naked road flare,” Josh said.
Eliot came in with a tureen full of viscous, unappetizing
flip and began ladling it into teacups. Alice picked up her
book and headed for the stairs.
“Hang on, I’m coming back with the hot ones!” Eliot
called, busily grating nutmeg.
Quentin didn’t hang on. He followed Alice.
At first he’d thought everything would be different
between him and Alice. Then he thought everything was
back to normal. Now he understood that he didn’t want
things to be back to normal. He couldn’t stop looking at her,
even after she’d looked at him, seen him looking at her,
and looked away in embarrassment again. It was like she’d
become charged in some way that drew him to her
uncontrollably. He could sense her naked body inside her
dress, smell it like a vampire smells blood. Maybe
Mayakovsky hadn’t quite managed to get all the fox out of
him.He found her in one of the upstairs bedrooms. She was
lying on one of a pair of twin beds, on top of the bedspread,
reading. It was dim and hot. The roof slanted in at an odd
angle. The room was full of odd, old furniture—a wicker
chair with a staved-in seat, a dresser with a stuck drawer—
and it had deep red wallpaper that didn’t match any other
room in the house. Quentin yanked up the window halfway
—it made an outraged squawk—and flopped down on the
other twin bed.
“Can you believe they have these here? It’s a full set—
they were in the bookcase in the bathroom.” She held up
the book she was reading. Incredibly, it was an old copy of
The World in the Walls.
“I had that exact same edition.” The cover showed Martin
Chatwin halfway through the old grandfather clock, with his
feet still in this world and his amazed head poking into
Fillory, which was drawn as a groovy 1970s disco winter
wonderland.
“I haven’t looked at them for years. God, remember the
Cozy Horse? That big velvet horse that would just carry you
around? I wanted one so badly when I was that age. Did
you read them?”
Quentin wasn’t sure how much to reveal about his Fillory
obsession.
“I may have taken a look.”
Alice smirked and went back to the book. “Why is it that
you still think you can keep secrets from me?”
Quentin folded his hands behind his head and lay back
on the pillow and looked up at the low, tilted ceiling. This
wasn’t right. There was something brother-sister about it.
“Here. Budge over.”
He switched beds and lay down next to Alice, hip-
checking her sideways to make room on the narrow bed.
She held up the paperback, and they read together silentlyfor a few pages. Their shoulders and upper arms touched.
Quentin felt like the bed was on a train moving very fast,
and if he looked out the window he’d see the landscape
racing past. They were both breathing very carefully.
“I never got it about the Cozy Horse,” Quentin said after a
while. “First of all, there’s only one of it. Is there a whole
herd of Cozy Horses somewhere? And then it’s too useful.
You’d think somebody would have domesticated it by now.”
She whacked his head with the spine, not completely
gently.
“Somebody evil . You can’t break the Cozy Horse, the
Cozy Horse is a free spirit. Anyway it’s too big. I always
figured it was mechanical—somebody made it somehow.”
“Like who?”
“I don’t know. A magician. Somebody in the past.
Anyway the Cozy Horse is a girl thing.”
Janet stuck her head in. Apparently the exodus
downstairs was general.
“Ha!” Janet brayed. “I can’t believe you’re reading that.”
Alice scooched an inch away from him, instinctively, but
he didn’t move.
“Like you didn’t,” Quentin said.
“Of course I did! When I was nine I made my family call
me ‘Fiona’ for two weeks.”
She vanished, leaving behind a comfortable, echoless
silence. The room was cooling down as hot air ascended
out through the half-open window. Quentin imagined it
rising in an invisible braided plume into the blue summer
day.
“Did you know there really was a Chatwin family?” he
asked. “In real life? Supposedly they lived next door to
Plover.”Alice nodded. She unscooched now that Janet was
gone. “It’s sad though.”
“Sad how.”
“Well, do you know what happened to them?”
Quentin shook his head.
“There’s a book about it. Most of them grew up to be
pretty boring. Housewives and insurance magnates and
whatnot. I think one of the boys married an heiress. I know
one got killed in World War Two. But you know the thing
about Martin?”
Quentin shook his head.
“Well, you know how he disappears in the book? He
really did disappear. He ran away or had an accident or
something. One day after breakfast he just vanished, and
they never saw him again.”
“The real Martin?”
“The real Martin.”
“God. That is sad.”
He tried to imagine it, a big fresh-faced, floppy-haired
English family—he pictured them in a sepia-toned family
portrait, in tennis whites—suddenly with a gaping hole
opening in the middle of it. The somber announcement. The
slow, decorous acceptance. The lingering damage.
“It makes me think of my brother,” Alice said.
“I know.”
At this she looked at him sharply. He looked back. It was
true, he did know.
He propped himself up on one elbow so he could look
down at her, the air around him whirling with excited dust
motes. “When I was little,” he said slowly, “and even when I
was not so little, I used to envy Martin.”She smiled up at him.
“I know.”
“Because I thought he’d finally done it. I know it was
supposed to be a tragedy, but to me it was like he broke
the bank, beat the system. He got to stay in Fillory forever.”
“I know. I get it.” She put a restraining hand on his chest.
“That’s what makes you different from the rest of us,
Quentin. You actually still believe in magic. You do realize,
right, that nobody else does? I mean, we all know magic is
real. But you really believe in it. Don’t you.”
He felt flustered. “Is that wrong?”
She nodded and smiled even more brightly. “Yes,
Quentin. It’s wrong.”
He kissed her, softly at first. Then he got up and locked
the door.
And that’s how it started, though of course it had been
starting for a long time. At first it was like they were getting
away with something, as if they half expected someone or
something to stop them. When nothing happened, and
there were no consequences, they lost control—they
ravenously, roughly pulled each other’s clothes off, not just
out of desire for each other but out of a pure desire to lose
control. It was like a fantasy. The sound of breathing and
rustling cloth was thunderous in the little chaste bedroom.
God only knew what they could hear downstairs. He wanted
to push her, to see if she had it as bad as he did, to see
how far she’d go and how far she’d let him go. She didn’t
stop him. She pushed him ever further. It wasn’t his first
time, or even his first time with Alice, technically, but this
was different. This was real, human sex, and it was so
much better just because they weren’t animals—because
they were civilized and prudish and self-conscious humans
who transformed into sweaty, lustful, naked beasts, not
through magic but because that’s who on some level they
really were all along.They tried to be discreet about it—they barely even
discussed it between themselves—but the others knew,
and they came up with excuses to leave the two of them
alone, and Quentin and Alice took them. Probably they
were relieved that the tension between them was finally
over. In its way the fact that Alice wanted Quentin as much
as he wanted her was as much of a miracle as anything
else he’d seen since he came to Brakebills, and no easier
to believe, though he had no choice but to believe it. His
love for Julia had been a liability, a dangerous force that
lashed him to cold, empty Brooklyn. Alice’s love was so
much more real, and it bound him finally and for good to his
new life, his real life, at Brakebills. It fixed him here and
nowhere else. It wasn’t a fantasy. It was flesh and blood.
And she understood that. She seemed to know
everything about Quentin, everything he was thinking and
feeling, sometimes before he did, and she wanted him in
spite of it—because of it. Together they rudely colonized
the upstairs at the Cottage, running back to the dorms only
for indispensable personal items, and letting it be known
that trespassers would be exposed to displays of mutual
affection, verbal and otherwise, and the sight of their
scattered underthings.
That wasn’t the only miraculous event that summer.
Astoundingly, the three older Physical Kids had graduated
from Brakebills. Even Josh, with his lousy grades. The
official ceremony would happen in another week; it was a
private affair to which the rest of the school was not invited.
By tradition they would be allowed to stay at Brakebills for
the rest of the summer, but after that they would be ushered
out into the world.
Quentin was stunned by this turn of events. They all were.
It was hard to imagine life at Brakebills without them; it was
hard for Quentin to imagine life after Brakebills at all. There
hadn’t been much discussion of what they were going to donext, or at least not around Quentin.
It wasn’t necessarily a cause for alarm. The passage
from Brakebills to the outside world was a well-traveled
one. There was an extensive network of magicians
operating in the wider world, and, being magicians, they
were in no danger of starving. They could do more or less
whatever they wanted as long as they didn’t interfere with
one another. The real problem was figuring out to their own
satisfaction what that was. Some of the student body went
into public service—quietly promoting the success of
humanitarian causes, or subtly propping up the balance of
various failing ecosystems, or participating in the
governance of magical society, such as it was. A lot of
people just traveled, or created magical artworks, or
staged elaborate sorcerous war games. Others went into
research: many magical schools (although not Brakebills)
offered programs of post-graduate study, with various
advanced degrees conferred at the end. Some students
even chose to matriculate at a regular, nonmagical
university. The application of conventional science,
chemistry especially, to magical techniques was a hot field.
Who knew what exotic spells you could create using the
new trans uranic elements?
“I was thinking of trying to talk to the Thames dragon
about it,” Eliot said airily one afternoon. They were sitting
on the floor in the library. It was too hot for chairs.
“The who?” Quentin said.
“You think he would see you?” Josh asked.
“You never know till you ask.”
“Wait a minute,” Quentin said. “Who or what is the
Thames dragon?”
“The Thames dragon,” Eliot said. “You know. The dragon
who lives in the Thames. I’m sure he has another name, a
dragon name, but I doubt we could pronounce it.”
“What are you saying.” Quentin looked around for help.“An actual dragon? Are you saying there are real dragons?”
He hadn’t quite reached the point where he always knew
when he was being made fun of.
“Come on, Quentin,” Janet scoffed. They’d gotten to the
part of Push where they flipped cards across the room into
a hat. They were using a mixing bowl from the kitchen.
“I’m not kidding.”
“You really don’t know? Didn’t you read the McCabe?”
Alice looked at him incredulously. “It was in Meerck’s
class.”
“No, I did not read the McCabe,” Quentin said. He didn’t
know whether to be angry or excited. “You could have just
told me there were real dragons.”
She sniffed. “It never came up.”
Apparently there really were such things as dragons,
though they were rare, and most of them were water
dragons, solitary creatures who rarely broke the surface
and spent a lot of their time asleep, buried in river mud.
There was one—no more—in each of the world’s major
rivers, and being smart and practically immortal, they
tended to stash away all kinds of odd bits of wisdom. The
Thames dragon was not as sociable as the Ganges
dragon, the Mississippi dragon, or the Neva dragon, but it
was said to be much smarter and more interesting. The
Hudson River had a dragon of its own—it spent most of its
time curled up in a deep, shadowy eddy less than a mile
from the Brakebills boathouse. It hadn’t been seen for
almost a century. The largest and oldest known dragon was
a colossal white who lived coiled up inside a huge
freshwater aquifer under the Antarctic ice cap, and who had
never once in recorded history spoken to anyone, not even
its own kind.
“But you really think the Thames dragon is going to give
you free career advice?” Josh said.
“Oh, I don’t know,” Eliot said. “Dragons are so weirdabout these things. You want to ask them deep, profound
questions, like where does magic come from, or are there
aliens, or what are the next ten Mersenne primes, and half
the time they just want to play Chinese checkers.”
“I love Chinese checkers!” Janet said.
“Well, okay, maybe you should go talk to the Thames
dragon,” Eliot said irritably.
“Maybe I will,” she said happily. “I think we’d have a lot to
talk about.”
Quentin felt like all the Physical Kids were falling in love with
each other, not just him and Alice, or at least with who they
were when they were around each other. In the mornings
they slept late. In the afternoons they played pool and
boated on the Hudson and interpreted each other’s dreams
and debated meaningless points of magical technique.
They discussed the varying intensities and timbres of their
hangovers. There was an ongoing competition, hotly
contested, as to who could make the single most boring
observation.
Josh was teaching himself to play the rinky-tink upright
piano in the upstairs hallway, and they lay on the grass and
listened to his halting rendition of “Heart and Soul,” over
and over and over again. It should have been annoying, but
somehow it wasn’t.
By this point they had thoroughly co-opted the butler,
Chambers, who regularly furnished them with extra-special
bottles from the Brakebills cellars, which were overcrowded
anyway and needed to be drunk up. Eliot was the only one
with any real sophistication in oenological matters, and he
tried to teach the rest of them, but Quentin’s tolerance was
low, and he refused to spit as a matter of principle, so he
just ended up getting drunk every night and forgetting
whatever he was supposed to be learning and starting over
from scratch the next night. Every morning when he wokeup it seemed impossible that he could ever consume
another drop of alcohol, but that conviction had always
evaporated by five o’clock in the afternoon.EMILY GREENSTREET
One afternoon all five of them were sitting cross-legged in a
circle in the vast empty middle of the Sea. It was a baking
hot summer day, and they had gone out there with the
intention of attempting a ridiculously elaborate piece of
collaborative magic, a five-person spell that, if it worked,
would sharpen their vision and hearing and increase their
physical strength for a couple of hours. It was Viking magic,
battlefield magic designed for a raiding party, and as far as
any of them knew it hadn’t been tried in roughly a
millennium. Josh, who was directing their efforts, confessed
that he wasn’t completely sure it had ever worked in the first
place. Those Viking shamans did a lot of for empty
boasting.
They had started drinking early, over lunch. Even though
Josh said everything was ready at noon—done deal, good
to go, let’s hook it up—by the time he actually gave them
their handouts, spiral-ring pages of Old Norse chants
scratched out in ballpoint in Josh’s neat, tiny runic script,
and prepared the ground by pouring out a weaving,
branching knot in black sand on the grass, it was almost
four. There was singing involved, and neither Janet nor
Quentin could carry a tune, and they kept cracking each
other up and having to start over.
Finally they got all the way through it, and they sat around
staring at the grass and the sky and the backs of their
hands and the clock tower in the distance, trying to tell if
anything was different. Quentin jogged to the edge of the
forest to pee, and when he got back Janet was talking
about somebody named Emily Greenstreet.
“Don’t tell me you knew her,” Eliot said.
“ I didn’t. But remember I roomed with that cow Emma
Curtis during First Year? I was talking to her cousin last
week when I was home, she lives near my parents in L.A.She was here then. Told me the whole story.”
“Really.”
“And now you’re going to tell us,” Josh said.
“It’s all a big secret, though. You can’t tell anybody.”
“Emma wasn’t a cow,” Josh said. “Or if she was she was
a hot cow. She’s like one of those wagyu cows. Did she
ever pay you back for that dress she threw up on?” He was
lying on his back, staring up into the cloudless sky. He
didn’t seem to care if the spell had worked or not.
“No, she didn’t. And now she’s gone to Tajikistan or
something to save the vanishing Asiatic grasshopper. Or
something. Cow.”
“Who’s Emily Greenstreet?” Alice asked.
“Emily Greenstreet,” Janet said grandly, savoring the
rich, satisfying piece of gossip she was about to impart,
“was the first person to leave Brakebills voluntarily in one
hundred fifty years.”
Her words floated up and drifted away like cigarette
smoke in the warm summer air. It was hot out in the middle
of the Sea, with no shade, but they were all too lazy to
move.
“She came to Brakebills about eight years ago. I think
she was from Connecticut, but not fancy Connecticut, with
the money and the Kennedy cousins and the Lyme
disease. I think she was from New Haven, or Bridge-port.
She was quiet, sort of mousy-looking—”
“How do you know she was mousy-looking?” Josh
asked.
“Sh!” Alice whacked Josh on the arm. “Don’t antagonize
her. I want to hear the story.” They were all lying on a stripy
blanket spread out over the ruins of Josh’s sand pattern.
“I know because Emma’s cousin told me. Anyway, it’s my
story, and if I say she was mousy, then she had a tail andshe lived on Swiss fucking cheese.
“Emily Greenstreet was one of these girls that nobody
ever notices, who are only friends with other girls nobody
notices. Nobody likes or dislikes them. They have weak
chins or chicken-pox scars, or their glasses are too big. I
know I’m being mean. But you know, they’re just sort of at
the edge of everything.
“She was a good student. She kept busy and got by in
her boring little way until her Third Year, when she finally
distinguished herself by falling in love with one of her
professors.
“Everybody does it, of course. Or at least the girls do,
since we all have daddy complexes. But usually it’s just a
crush, and we get over it and move on to some loser guy
our own age. But not our Emily. She was deeply,
passionately, delusionally in love. Wuthering Heights love.
She stood outside his window at night. She drew little
pictures of him in class. She looked at the moon and cried.
She drew little pictures of the moon in class and cried at
them.
“She become moody and depressed. She started
wearing black and listening to the Smiths and reading
Camus in the original whatever. Her eyes became
interestingly pouchy and sunken. She started hanging out at
Woof.”
All groaned. Woof was a fountain in the Maze; its official
name was Van Pelt, after an eighteenth-century Dean, but it
depicted Romulus and Remus suckling from a she-wolf with
many dangling wolf-boobs, hence Woof. It was the chosen
hangout of the goths and the artsy crowd.
“Now she had a Secret, capital S , and ironically it made
her more attractive to people, because they wanted to
know what her Secret was. And sure enough, before long a
boy, some deeply unfortunate boy, fell in love with her.
“She didn’t love this boy back, since she was savin’ allher lovin’ for Professor Sexyman, but he made her feel
pretty damn good, since nobody had ever been in love with
her before. She strung him along and flirted with him in
public in the hope that it would make her real love interest
jealous.
“Now we turn to the third point in our little triangle of love.
By all rights the professor should have been completely
impervious to our Emily’s charms. He should have had an
avuncular little chuckle over it in the Senior Common Room
and then forgotten about it. She wasn’t even that hot.
Maybe he was having a midlife crisis, maybe he thought a
liaison with Ms. Greenstreet could restore to him some of
his long-vanished youth. Who knows. He was married, too,
the idiot.
“We’ll never know exactly what happened or how far it
went, except that it went too far, and then Professor
Sexyman came to his senses, or got what he wanted, and
he called it off.
“Needless to say our Emily became even gothier and
weepier and more like a Gorey drawing than she already
was, and her boy became even more besotted and brought
her presents and flowers and was Supportive.
“Maybe you knew this, I don’t know, I didn’t, but Woof
used to be different from the other fountains. That’s why the
doomers started hanging out there in the first place. You
wouldn’t notice what was off about it, at first, but after a
while you’d realize that when you looked into it, you wouldn’t
see your own reflection, just empty sky. And maybe if the
sky was cloudy on that particular day, the sky in the fountain
would be blue, or the other way around. It definitely wasn’t a
normal reflection. And every once in a while you’d look into
it and you’d see other faces looking up at you, looking
puzzled, as if they were looking into some other fountain
somewhere else and were weirded out because they were
seeing your face and not their own. Somebody must have
figured out a way to switch the reflections in two fountains,
but who did it and why, and how, and why the Dean didn’tchange them back, I have no idea.
“You have to wonder, too, if it was more than just the
reflections—if you could dive down into one pool and come
up in the other one, in this world or some other world.
There’s always been something off about those fountains.
Did you know they were here before Brakebills? They built
the school to be near them, and not the other way around.
Or that’s what people say.”
Eliot snorted.
“Well that’s what people say, darling. Anyway, ” Janet
went on, “the thing is, Emily started spending a lot of time at
Woof, just smoking and hanging out, and I guess mooning
over her little affair. She spent so much time there that she
started to recognize one of the faces in the fountain.
Somebody like her, who was spending a lot of time at the
other fountain, the one in the reflection. Let’s call her Doris.
After a while Emily and Doris got to noticing each other.
They’d acknowledge each other, a little wave, you know,
just to be polite. Probably Doris was a little mopey, too.
They got to feeling like kindred spirits.
“Emily and Doris worked out a way to communicate.
Again, the exact details have eluded your intrepid
correspondent. Maybe they held up signs or something.
They must have had to be in mirror writing, to make sense
as reflections, or am I getting that wrong?
“I don’t know how things worked in Woofland, where
Doris lived, maybe magic is different there. Or maybe
Doris was fucking with our Emily, maybe she was sick of
hearing Emily whine about her love life. Maybe there was
something really wrong with Doris, maybe she was
something genuinely evil. But one day Doris suggested that
if Emily wanted her lover back, maybe her appearance was
the problem, and she should try changing it?”
A chill settled over the group, where they lay on the sun-
warm turf. Even Quentin knew that using magic to alter
one’s physical appearance never ended well. In the world ofmagical theory it was a dead spot: something about the
inextricable, recursive connection between your face and
who you were—your soul, for lack of a better word—made
it hellishly difficult and fatally unpredictable. When Quentin
had first gotten to Brakebills, he’d wondered why everybody
didn’t just make themselves ridiculously good-looking. He’d
looked at the kids with an obviously flawed feature—like
Gretchen with her leg, or Eliot with his twisted jaw—and
wondered why they didn’t get somebody to fix them up, like
Hermione with her teeth in Harry Potter . But in reality it
always ended in disaster.
“Poor Emily,” Janet said. “When she took down the spell
that Doris taught her through the fountain, she actually
thought she’d found it, the secret technique everybody else
had missed. It was elaborate and costly, but it really looked
like it might work. After a few weeks of laying the
groundwork, she put it together one night by herself in her
room.
“How do you think she felt when she looked in the mirror
and saw what she’d done to herself ?” You could almost
hear a note of genuine sympathy in Janet’s hard voice. “I
can’t imagine. I really can’t.”
It was late enough in the afternoon now that the shadows
from the forest had almost stretched out from the western
edge of the Sea far enough to lap at the edge of their
blanket.
“Must have been she could still talk, because she got
word to her boy that she was in trouble, and he came to her
room, and after much preliminary whispering through the
keyhole she let him in. And we have to give our boy credit. It
must have been bad, very bad, but he stuck by her. She
wouldn’t let him go to the faculty—Dunleavy was still Dean,
and she would have kicked Emily out without thinking about
it.
“So he told her to stay there, don’t move, don’t do
anything to make it worse, he would go to the library andsee what he could find.
“He came back just before dawn, thinking he had it pretty
much worked out. You can imagine the scene. They’d both
been up all night. They’re sitting cross-legged on her little
bed, her with her scrambled head, him with about eight
books open around him on the covers. He’s mixed up a few
reagents in cereal bowls from the dining hall. She’s leaning
what’s left of her forehead against the wall, trying to keep
cool. The blue in the window is getting brighter and brighter,
they’ve got to take care of this soon. She’d probably gone
past panic and regret at this point. But not past hope.
“But then think about his state of mind. In a way, for him, it
was the perfect thing to have happen. This is his golden
moment, his chance to be the hero, to save her and win her
love, or at least some pity sex. It’s his chance to be strong
for her, which is the only thing he’s ever wanted to do.
“But I don’t know, I think he’d had enough time at this
point, maybe he’d figured out what was really going on. I’m
guessing the dime had finally dropped. She’d taken a
terrible chance, and he had to know she hadn’t done it for
him.
“Either way he was in no shape to be doing major
wizardry. He was tired and scared and in over his head,
and I think his heart must have been broken a little, too.
Maybe he just wanted it too badly. He launched into the
repair spell, which I happen to know which one it was, it
was from the Major Arcana, Renaissance stuff. Big
energies. It got away from him in the worst possible way. It
took him over, took his body away. Right in front of her
eyes, he burned up screaming. Blue fire. He became a
niffin .”
That’s what Fogg was talking about that night in the
infirmary, Quen tin thought. About losing control. Apparently
the others knew what the word meant, niffin . They stared at
Janet like they’d been turned to stone.
“Well. Emily freaked out, I mean freaked out. Barricadedthe door, wouldn’t let anybody in until her beloved professor
himself showed up. By that point the whole school was
awake. I can only imagine how he felt, since in a way the
whole thing was his fault. He can’t have been too proud of
himself. I suppose he would have had to try to banish the
niffin if it didn’t want to leave. I don’t know if even he could
have. I don’t think those things really have an upper limit.
“Anyway, he kept his head, kept everybody else out of
the room. He put her face back, right there on the spot,
which cannot have been easy. Whatever else he was he
must have been some magician, because that spell that
came through the fountain, that was a nasty piece of work.
And she probably twisted it up even more in the casting,
too. But he parsed it on the fly and made her reasonably
presentable, though I hear she’s never been quite the way
she was. Not like she’s deformed or anything, just different.
Probably if you hadn’t met her you would never know.
“And that’s pretty much it. I can’t even imagine what they
told the boy’s parents. I hear he was from a magical family,
so they probably got some version of the truth. But, you
know, the clean version.”
There was a long silence. A bell was clanging far away, a
boat on the river. The shadow from the trees had flooded all
the way over them, deliciously cool in the late-summer
afternoon.
Alice cleared her throat. “What happened to the
professor?”
“You haven’t figured it out?” Janet didn’t bother to
conceal her glee. “They gave him a choice: resign in
disgrace . . . or transfer to Antarctica. Brakebills South.
Guess which one he took.”
“Oh my God,” Josh said. “It was Mayakovsky.”
“That explains a hell of a lot,” Quentin said.
“Doesn’t it though? Doesn’t it just?”“So what happened to Emily Greenstreet?” Alice asked.
“She just left school?” There was a trace of ground steel in
her voice. Quentin wasn’t totally sure where it was coming
from. “What happened to her? Did they send her to a
normal school?”
“I hear she does something businessy in Manhattan,”
Janet said. “They set her up with an easy corporate job, I
don’t know, management consulting or something. We own
part of some big firm. Lots of magic to cover up the fact that
she doesn’t do anything. She just sits in an office and surfs
the Web all day. I think part of her just didn’t survive what
happened, you know?”
After that even Janet stopped talking. Quentin let himself
drift among the clouds. He felt spinny from the wine, like the
Earth had come untightened and was wobbling loose on its
gimbaled base. Apparently he wasn’t the only one,
because when Josh stood up after a few minutes he
immediately lost his balance and fell over again on the turf.
There was scattered applause.
But then he stood up again, steadied himself, did a slow,
deep knee bend, and executed a perfect standing backflip.
He stuck the landing and straightened up, beaming.
“It worked,” he said. “I can’t believe it. I take back
everything bad I ever said about Viking shamans! It fucking
worked!”
The spell had worked, though for some reason Josh was
the only one who got anything out of it. As they picked up
the picnic things and shook the sand out of the blanket,
Josh did laps around the field, whooping and making huge
superhero leaps in the fading light.
“I am a Viking warrior! Cower before my might! Cower!
The strength of Thor and all his mighty hosts flows through
me! And I fucked your mother! I . . . fucked . . . your . . .
motherrrrrrrrrr!”
“He’s so happy,” Eliot said dryly. “It’s like he cookedsomething and it came out looking like the picture in the
cookbook.”
Eventually Josh disappeared in search of other people to
show off to, loudly singing “The Battle Hymn of the
Republic.” Janet and Eliot straggled off in the direction of
the Cottage, Alice and Quentin toward the House, sunburnt
and sleepy and still half drunk. Quentin had already made
up his mind to nap through dinner.
“He’s going to hurt somebody,” he said. “Probably
himself.”
“There’s some damage resistance built in. Strengthening
the skin and the skeleton. He could put his fist through a
wall and probably not break anything.”
“Probably. If he can, he will.”
Alice was even more quiet than usual. It wasn’t until they
were deep in the twilight alleys of the Maze that Quentin
saw that her face was slick with tears. His heart went cold.
“Alice. Alice, sweetheart.” He stopped and turned her to
face him. “What is it?”
She pressed her face miserably into his shoulder.
“Why did she have to tell that story?” she said. “Why?
Why is she like that?”
Quentin immediately felt guilty for having enjoyed it. It was
a horrible story. But there was something irresistibly gothic
about it, too.
“She’s just a gossip,” he said. “She doesn’t mean
anything.”
“Doesn’t she?” She pulled back, fiercely wiping her tears
with the backs of her hands. “Doesn’t she? I always thought
my brother died in a car crash.”
“Your brother?” Quentin froze. “I don’t understand.”
“He was eight years older than me. My parents told mehe died in a car crash. But that was him, I’m sure it was.”
“I don’t understand. You think he was that boy in the
story?”
She nodded. “I think he was. I know he was.” Her eyes
were red and rubbed with rage and hurt.
“Jesus. Look, it’s just a story. There’s no way she could
know.”
“She knows.” Alice kept walking. “It all works out, the
timing of it. And he was like that. Charlie—he was always
falling in love with people. He would have tried to save her
himself. He would have done that.” She shook her head
bitterly. “He was stupid that way.”
“Maybe she didn’t know. Maybe Janet didn’t realize it
was him.”
“That’s what she wants everybody to think! So you won’t
realize what a howling cunt she is!”
Howling was a big word at Brakebills that year. Quentin
was about to keep defending Janet when something else
clicked.
“That’s why you weren’t Invited here,” he said quietly. “It
has to be. Because of what happened to your brother.”
She nodded, her eyes unfocused now, her relentless
brain chewing away at this wrinkle, fitting other things into
the bleak new picture it created.
“They didn’t want anything to happen to me. As if it would.
God, why is everybody else in the world but us so fucking
stupid?”
They stopped a few yards short of the edge of the Maze,
in the deep shadow that pooled where the hedges grew
close together, as if they couldn’t face the daylight again,
not quite yet.
“At least now I know,” she said. “But why did she tell that
story, Q? She knew it would hurt me. Why would she dothat?”
He shook his head. The idea of conflict within their little
clique made him uncomfortable. He wanted to explain it
away. He wanted everything to be perfect.
“She’s just bitter,” he said finally, “because you’re the
pretty one.”
Alice snorted.
“She’s bitter because we’re happy,” she said, “and she’s
in love with Eliot. Always has been. And he doesn’t love
her.”
She started walking again.
“What? Wait.” Quentin shook his head, as if that would
make all the pieces fit together again. “Why would she want
Eliot?”
“Because she can’t have him?” Alice said bitterly, without
looking back at him. “And she has to have everything? I’m
surprised she hasn’t come after you. What, you think she
hasn’t slept with Josh?”
They left the Maze and climbed the stairs to the rear
terrace, lit by the yellow light coming through the French
doors and littered with premature autumn leaves. Alice
cleaned herself up as best she could with the heels of her
hands. She didn’t wear much makeup anyway. Quentin
stood by and silently handed her tissues to blow her nose
with, adrift in his own thoughts. It never failed to astonish
him, then or ever, how much of the world around him was
mysterious and hidden from view.FIFTH YEAR
Then September came, and it was just Quentin and Alice.
The others were gone, in a swirl of falling leaves and a
crackle of early frost.
It was a shock to see them go, but along with the shock,
mixed in with it like the liquor in a cocktail, was an even
greater feeling of relief. Quen tin wanted things to be good
between them, to be better than good, to be perfect. But
perfection is a nervy business, because the moment you
spot the tiniest flaw it’s ruined. Perfection was part of
Quentin’s mythology of Brakebills, the story he told himself
about his life there, a narrative as carefully constructed and
reverently maintained as Fillory and Further , and he
wanted to be able not just to tell it to himself but to believe
it. That had been getting progressively more difficult.
Pressure was building up in some subterranean holding
tank, and right at the end there things had begun to come
apart. Even Quentin, with his almost limitless capacity for
ignoring the obvious, had begun to pick up on it. Maybe
Alice was right, maybe Janet really did hate her and love
Eliot. Maybe it was something else, something so glaringly
obvious that Quentin couldn’t stand to look at it directly. One
way or another the bonds that held them together were
starting to fray, they were losing their magical ability to
effortlessly love one another. Now, even though things
would never be the same, even though they’d never be
together in the same way, at least he could always
remember it the way he wanted to. The memories were
safe, sealed forever in amber.
As soon as the semester began Quentin did something
he had already put off for much too long: he went to Dean
Fogg and told him what had happened to Julia. Fogg just
frowned and told him he’d take care of it. Quentin wanted to
climb across the desk and grab Fogg by his natty lapels for
what he’d done to her by screwing up the memory spells.He tried to explain to Fogg that he had made Julia suffer in
a way that nobody should ever have to suffer. Fogg just
watched, neither moved nor unmoved. In the end the best
Quentin could do was to make him promise that he would
strain whatever the applicable regulations were to the
breaking point to make things easier for her. It was all he
could think of. He left Fogg’s office feeling exactly as bad
as he had when he entered it.
Sitting at dinner, or strolling between classes through the
dusty hallways full of sideways afternoon light, Quentin
began to realize for the first time how cut off from the rest of
the school he and Alice had been for the past two years,
and how few of the other students he really knew. All the
groups were cliques unto themselves, but the Physical Kids
had been especially tight, and now he and Alice were all
that was left of them. He still had classes with the other Fifth
Years, and he chatted with them in a friendly way, but he
knew that their loyalties and their attention were elsewhere.
“I bet they think we’re horrible snobs,” Alice said one day.
“The way we keep to ourselves.”
They were sitting on the cool stone rim of the fountain
known as Sammy, a knockoff of the Laocoön in Rome,
serpents strangling the renegade priest and his sons, but
with water squirting cheerfully out of everybody’s mouths.
They had come out to try a piece of messy domestic magic
for removing stains from a skirt of Alice’s, that was best
performed outdoors, but they’d forgotten a key ingredient,
turmeric, and weren’t ready to face the walk back yet. It was
a beautiful fall Saturday morning, or really it was closer to
noon, the temperature balanced precariously on the tipping
point between warm and chilly.
“You think so?”
“Don’t you?”
“No, you’re probably right.” He sighed. “They probably
do. Uncharitable bastards. They’re the snobs.”Alice tossed an acorn overhand at the fountain. It ticked
off one of the dying priest’s sturdy knees and into the water.
“Do you think we are? Snobs, I mean?” Quentin asked.
“I don’t know. Not necessarily. No, I don’t think we are.
We have nothing against them.”
“Exactly. Some of them are perfectly fine.”
“Some of them we hold in the highest esteem.”
“Exactly.” Quentin dabbled his fingertips in the water. “So
what are you saying? We should go out and make friends?”
She shrugged. “They’re the only other magicians our age
on the continent. They’re the only peers we’ll ever have.”
The sky was burning blue, and the tree branches stood
out sharply against it in the clear, shivering reflection in the
fountain.
“Okay,” Quentin said. “But not with all of them.”
“Well, God no. We’ll be discriminating. Anyway, who
even knows if they’ll want to be friends with us?”
“Right. So who?”
“Does it matter?”
“Of course it matters, Vix,” Quentin said. “It’s not like
they’re all the same.” “Vix” was a term of endearment with
them, short for vixen, an allusion to their Antarctic interlude,
vixen being the word for a female fox.
“So who?”
“Surendra.”
“Okay. Sure. Or no, he’s going out with that horrible
Second Year. You know, with the teeth. She’s always trying
to make people do madrigals after dinner. What about
Georgia?”
“Maybe we’re overthinking this. We can’t force it. We’ll
just let it happen naturally.”“Okay.” Quentin watched her study her nails with her
intense, birdlike focus. Sometimes she looked so beautiful
he couldn’t believe she had anything to do with him. He
could barely believe she existed at all.
“But you have to do it,” she said. “If it’s me, nothing’s
going to happen. You know I’m pathetic at that kind of
thing.”
“I know.”
She threw an acorn at him.
“You weren’t supposed to agree.”
And so, with a concerted effort, they roused themselves
from their stupor and embarked on a belated campaign to
socialize with the rest of their class, most of whom they’d
drifted almost completely out of touch with. In the end it
wasn’t Surendra or Georgia but Gretchen—the blond girl
who walked with a cane—who turned out to be the key. It
helped that Alice and Gretchen were both prefects, which
was a source of both pride and embarrassment to them.
The position carried with it almost no official duties; mostly
it was just yet another absurd, infantilizing idea borrowed
from the English public school system, a symptom of the
Anglophilia that was embedded so deeply in the
institutional DNA of Brakebills. Prefectships were given to
the four students in the Fourth and Fifth Years with the
highest GPA, who then got (or had) to wear a silver pin in
the shape of a bee on their jackets. Their actual
responsibilities were petty things like regulating access to
the single phone on campus, an obsolete rotary monster
hidden away in a battle-scarred wooden phone booth that
was itself tucked away under a back staircase, which
always had a line a dozen students long. In return they had
access to the Prefects’ Common Room, a special locked
lounge on the east side of the House with a high,
handsome arched window and a cabinet that was always
stocked with sticky-sweet sherry that Quen tin and Alice
forced themselves to drink.The Prefects’ Common Room was also an excellent
place to have sex in, as long as they could square it with the
other prefects in advance, but that usually wasn’t a problem.
Gretchen was sympathetic, since she had a boyfriend of
her own, and the third prefect was a popular girl with spiky
blond hair named Beatrice, whom nobody had even
realized was especially smart before she was named a
prefect. She never used the room anyway. The only real
trick was avoiding the fourth prefect, because the fourth
prefect was, of all people, Penny.
The announcement that Penny was a prefect was so
universally, gobsmackingly surprising that nobody talked
about anything else for the rest of the day. Quentin had
barely spoken to Penny since their infamous altercation, not
that he’d gone looking for him. From that day on Penny had
become a loner, a ghost, which was not an easy thing to be
at a school as small as Brakebills, but he had a talent for it.
He walked quickly between classes with a flat, frozen stare
on his round frying-pan face, bolted his food at mealtimes,
went on long solitary rambles, stayed in his room in the
afternoons after class, went to bed early, got up at dawn.
What else he did, nobody knew. When the Brakebills
students were sorted into groups by Discipline at the end of
second year, Penny wasn’t assigned to a group at all. The
rumor was that he had tested into a Discipline so arcane
and outlandish it couldn’t be classified according to any of
the conventional schemes. Whether it was true or not, next
to his name on the official list Fogg had simply put the word
INDEPENDENT. He rarely turned up in class after that, and
when he did he lurked silently in the back of the room with
his hands shoved in the pockets of his fraying Brakebills
blazer, never asking questions, never taking notes. He had
an air of knowing things other people didn’t. He was
sometimes seen in the company of Professor Van der
Weghe, under whose guidance he was rumored to be
pursuing an intensive independent study.
The Prefects’ Common Room was an increasinglyimportant refuge for Quentin and Alice because their old
sanctuary, the Cottage, was no longer sacrosanct. Quentin
had never really thought about it, but it was pure chance that
last year nobody new had been placed in the Physical
group, thus preserving the integrity of their little clique. But
the drought was bound to come to an end, and it did. At the
end of the previous semester no fewer than four rising Third
Years had tested into Physical, and now, although it
seemed wrong in every possible way, they had as much
right to the Cottage as Quentin and Alice did.
They did their best to be good sports about it. On the first
day of classes they sat patiently in the library as the new
Physical Kids went through the ritual and broke into the
Cottage. They’d debated long and earnestly about what to
serve the newcomers when they came in, finally settling on
a goodish champagne and—not wanting to be selfish, even
though that was exactly how they felt—an obscenely
expensive array of oysters and caviar with toast points and
crème fraîche.
“Cool!” the new Physical Kids said, one after the other,
as they made their way inside. They goggled at the
oversize interior. They inspected the bric-a-brac and the
piano and the cabinet of alphabetized twigs. They looked
impossibly young. Quentin and Alice made small talk with
them, trying to be witty and knowing, the way they
remembered the others having been when they first got
there.
Sitting in a row on the couch, the Third Years squirmed
and sipped their champagne too quickly, like children
waiting to be excused. They asked polite questions about
the paintings and the Cottage library. Do the books
circulate outside the building? Did they really have a first-
edition Abecedarian Arcana in the hand of Pseudo-
Dionysius himself? Really. And when was the Cottage first
constructed? Really! Wow. That’s old. That’s, like, ancient.
Then, after a suitable interval, they disappeared en
masse into the pool room. They showed no particulardesire to be chaperoned there, and Quen tin and Alice had
no particular desire ever to see them again, so they stayed
where they were. As the evening wore on, the sounds of
adolescent bonding could be heard. It became apparent to
Quentin and Alice that they were relics of an earlier era that
had worn out its welcome. They had come full circle. They
were outsiders again.
“I feel like an elderly docent,” Quentin said.
“I already forget their names,” Alice said. “They’re like
quadruplets.”
“We should give them numbers. Tell them it’s a tradition.”
“And then we could always call them by the wrong
number. Freak them out. Or we could call them all the same
thing. Alfred or something.”
“Even the girls?”
“Especially the girls.”
They were sipping tepid leftover champagne. They were
getting drunk, but Quentin didn’t care. From the pool room
came the glittery tinkle of breaking glass—a champagne
flute, probably—and then, a little later, the sound of a sash
being raised and somebody throwing up, hopefully out the
window.
“The problem with growing up,” Quentin said, “is that
once you’re grown up, people who aren’t grown up aren’t
fun anymore.”
“We should have burned this place down,” Alice said
gloomily. They were definitely drunk. “Been the last ones
out the door and then tor ched it.”
“Then walked away with it burning behind us in the
background, like in a movie.”
“End of an era. End of an epoch. Which one? Era or
epoch? What’s the difference?”
Quentin didn’t know. They would have to find somethingelse, he thought mazily. Something new. Couldn’t stay here
anymore. Couldn’t go back. Only forward.
“Do you think we were ever like this?” Quentin asked.
“Like these kids?”
“Probably. I bet we were even worse. I don’t know how
the others put up with us.”
“You’re right,” he said. “You’re right. God, they were so
much nicer than we are.”
That winter Quentin didn’t go home for the holidays. Around
Christmas-time—real-world Christmas—he’d had the usual
conversation with his parents about Brakebills’ unusual
schedule, which he had to remind them about every year,
lounging inside the old phone booth under the back stairs
with one foot braced up against the folding wooden door.
Then by the time Brakebills-calendar Christmas rolled
around, it was already March in the real world, and it didn’t
seem like such a big deal not to go back. If they had asked
him—if they’d put it out there for an instant that they were
eager to see him, or that they would be disappointed if he
didn’t come—he might have caved. He would have, in a
second. But they were their usual blithe, oblivious, glassine
selves. And besides, he got an independent feeling from
coolly informing them that he had other plans, thanks very
much.
Instead Quentin went home with Alice. It was her idea,
though as it got closer to the holidays Quentin wasn’t
exactly sure why she’d invited him, since the prospect
obviously made her suicidally uncomfortable.
“I don’t know, I don’t know!” she said when he asked her.
“It just seemed like the kind of things boyfriends and
girlfriends do!”
“Well, whatever, I don’t have to come. I’ll just stay here.Just say I had a paper to finish or something. I’ll see you in
January.”
“But don’t you want to come?” she wailed.
“Of course I do. I want to see where you come from. I
want your parents to know who I am. And God knows I’m
not taking you back to my parents’ house.”
“All right.” She didn’t sound any less anxious. “Do you
promise to hate my parents as much as I do?”
“Oh, absolutely,” Quentin said. “Maybe even more.”
The opening of the portals home for vacation was always
a complicated and tedious procedure that inevitably led to
huge numbers of Brakebillians backed up with all their
luggage in a ragged line that wound down the dark, narrow
corridor leading to the main living room, where Professor
Van der Weghe was in charge of getting people where they
needed to go. Everybody was relieved that exams were
over, and there was always a lot of giddy pushing and
shoving and shrieking and casting of minor pyrotechnic
spells. Quentin and Alice waited together in silence with
their packed bags, solemnly, side by side, Quentin looking
as respectable as he could manage. He hardly had any
clothes anymore that weren’t part of his Brakebills uniform.
He knew Alice was from Illinois, and he knew Illinois was
in the Midwest, but he couldn’t have pointed to the precise
location of that state within a thousand miles. Apart from a
European vacation in junior high he’d barely ever been off
the East Coast, and his Brakebills education hadn’t done
much to improve his grasp of American geography. And as
it turned out he hardly saw Illinois anyway, or at least not its
exterior.
Professor Van der Weghe set up the portal to open
directly into an anteroom inside Alice’s parents’ house.
Stone walls, flat mosaic floors, post-and-lintel doorways on
all sides. It was a precise re-creation of a traditional
bourgeois Roman residence. Sound echoed in it like achurch. It was like stepping past the red velvet rope at a
museum. Magic tended to run in families—Quentin was an
exception in that respect—and Alice’s parents were both
magicians. She had never had to sneak around behind
their backs the way he had to with his parents.
“Welcome to the house that time forgot to forget,” Alice
said sulkily, kicking her bags into a corner. She led him by
the hand along an alarmingly long, dark corridor to a
sunken living room with cushions and hard Roman-style
couches strewn around at careless angles and a modest
plashing fountain in the middle.
“Daddy changes it all around every few years,” she
explained. “He mostly does architectural magic. When I
was little it was all Baroque, gold knobs on everything. That
was almost nice. But then it was Japanese paper screens
—you could hear every thing. Then it was Fallingwater—
Frank Lloyd Wright—until Mom got sick of living in a mildew
farm for some reason. And then for a while it was just a big
old Iroquois longhouse with a dirt floor. No walls. That was
hilarious. We had to beg him to put in a real bathroom. I
think he seriously thought we were going to watch him
defecate into a pit. I doubt even the Indians did that.”
With that she sat down heavily on a hard leather Roman
couch, opened a book, and became absorbed in her
vacation reading.
Quentin understood that it was sometimes better to wait
out Alice’s black periods than to try to coax her out of them.
Everybody has their own idiopathic reaction to their
childhood home. So he spent the next hour wandering
around what looked remarkably like an upper-middle-class
Pompeian household, complete with pornographic
frescoes. It was obsessively authentic except for the
bathrooms—a concession had obviously been granted on
that score. Even dinner, when it arrived, served by a squad
of three-foot-tall animated wooden marionettes who made
little click-clacking noises as they walked, was revoltingly
historical: calf brains, parrot tongues, a roasted moray eel,all peppered beyond the point of edibility, just in case they
weren’t inedible to begin with. Fortunately, there was plenty
of wine.
They had progressed to the third course, the stuffed and
roasted uterus of a sow, when a short, portly, round-faced
man suddenly appeared in the doorway. He was dressed in
a well-worn toga the gray of unlaundered bedsheets. He
hadn’t shaved for several days, and his dark stubble
extended well down his neck, and what hair he had left on
his head could have used cutting.
“Ave atque vales!” he proclaimed. He gave an elaborate,
made-up-looking Roman salute, which was essentially the
same as a Nazi salute. “Welcome to the domus of
Danielus !”
He made a face that implied that it was other people’s
fault that the joke wasn’t funny.
“Hi Dad,” Alice said. “Dad, this is my friend Quentin.”
“Hi.” Quentin stood up. He’d been trying to eat reclining,
Roman-style, but it was harder than it looked, and he had a
stitch in his side. Alice’s father shook his outstretched
hand. He seemed to forget he was doing it halfway through,
then looked surprised to find a fleshy alien extremity still in
his grip.
“Are you really eating that stuff? I had Domino’s an hour
ago.”
“We didn’t know there was anything else. Where’s
Mom?”
“Who knows?” Alice’s father said. He bugged his eyes
out like it was a wacky mystery. “She was working on one
of her compositions downstairs, last I saw.”
He jogged the few steps down into the room, sandals
slapping the stone tiles, and served himself some wine
from a decanter.
“And that was when? November?”“Don’t ask me. I lose track of time in this damn place.”
“Why don’t you put in some windows, Daddy? It’s so dark
in here.”
“Windows?” He bugged out his eyes again; it appeared
to be his signature facial expression. “You speak of some
barbarian magic of which we noble Romans know nothing!”
“You’ve done an amazing job here,” Quentin piped up,
the soul of obsequiousness. “It looks really authentic.”
“Thank you!” Alice’s father drained the goblet and poured
himself another, then sat down heavily on a couch, spilling a
purple track of wine down the front of his toga in the
process. His bare calves were plump and bone white;
black bristles stood straight out from them in static
astonishment. Quentin wondered how his beautiful Alice
could possibly share a single base pair of genetic
information with this person.
“It took me three years to put it together,” he said. “Three
years. And you know what? I’m already sick of it after two
months. I can’t eat the food, there are skid marks on my
toga, and I have plantar fasciitis from walking around on
these stone floors. What is the point of my life?” He looked
at Quentin furiously, as if he actually expected an answer,
as if Quentin were concealing it from him. “Would someone
tell me that, please? Because I have no idea! None!”
Alice glared at her father like he’d just killed her pet.
Quentin stayed perfectly still, as if that meant that Alice’s
father, like a dinosaur, couldn’t see him. They all three sat in
awkward silence for a long beat. Then he stood up.
“ Gratias —and good night!”
He tossed the train of his toga over his shoulder and
strode out of the room. The marionettes’ feet clack-clacked
on the stone floor as they mopped up the spilled wine he
left behind.
“That’s my dad!” Alice said loudly, and rolled her eyes asif she expected a laugh track to kick in behind her. None
did.
In the midst of this domestic wasteland Alice and Quentin
established a workable, even comfortable routine for
themselves, invaders staking out a safe perimeter deep in
hostile territory. It was weirdly liberating to be in the middle
of somebody else’s domestic agony—he could see the
bad emotional energy radiating out in all directions,
sterilizing every available surface with its poisonous
particles, but it passed through him harmlessly, like
neutrinos. He was like Superman here, he was from off-
planet, and that made him immune to any local villainy. But
he could see it doing its ruinous work on Alice, and he tried
to shield her as best he could. He knew the rules here
instinctively, what it meant to have parents who ignored you.
The only difference was that his parents did it because they
loved each other, Alice’s because they hated each other.
If nothing else the house was quiet and well stocked with
Roman-style wine, sweet but perfectly drinkable. It was also
reasonably private: he and Alice could share a bedroom
without her parents caring or even noticing. And there were
the baths: Alice’s dad had excavated huge, cavernous
underground Roman baths that they had all to themselves,
huge oblong aquifers scooped out of the midwestern
tundra. Every morning they would spend a good hour trying
to fling each other into the scalding caldarium and the
glacial frigidarium, which were equally unbearable, and
then soaking naked in the tepidarium.
Over the course of two weeks Quentin glimpsed Alice’s
mother exactly once. If anything, she looked even less like
Alice than Alice’s father did: she was thin and tall, taller than
her husband, with a long, narrow, animated face and a dry
bunch of blond-brown hair tied back behind her head. She
chattered earnestly to him about the research she was
doing on fairy music, which was, she explained, mostly
scored for tiny bells and inaudible to human beings. She
lectured Quentin for almost an hour, with no prompting onhis part, and without once asking him who he was or what
exactly he was doing in her house. At one point one of her
slight breasts wandered out of the misbuttoned cardigan
that she wore with nothing under it; she tucked it back in
without the slightest trace of embarrassment. Quentin had
the impression that it had been some time since she had
spoken to anybody.
“So I’m a little worried about your parents,” Quentin said
that afternoon. “I think they might be completely insane.”
They had retreated to Alice’s bedroom, where they lay
side by side on her enormous bed in their bathrobes,
looking up at the mosaic on the ceiling: Orpheus singing to
a ram, an antelope, and an assortment of attentive birds.
“Are they?”
“Alice, I think you know they’re kind of weird.”
“I guess. I mean, I hate them, but they’re my parents. I
don’t see them as insane, I see them as sane people who
deliberately act like this to torture me. When you say they’re
mentally ill, you’re just letting them off the hook. You’re
helping them elude prosecution.
“Anyway, I thought you might find them interesting,” she
said. “I know how mentally excited you get about anything
magical. Well, voila, for your enjoyment, two career
magicians.”
He wondered, theoretically, which of them had it worse.
Alice’s parents were toxic monsters, but at least you could
see it. His own parents were more like vampires or
werewolves—they passed for human. He could rave about
their atrocities all he wanted, he knew the villagers would
never believe him till it was too late.
“At any rate I can see where you get your social skills,” he
said.
“My point is, you don’t know what it’s like to grow up in a
family of magicians.”“Well, I didn’t know you had to wear a toga.”
“You don’t have to wear togas. That’s exactly the
problem, Q. You don’t have to do anything. This is what you
don’t understand! You don’t know any older magicians
except our professors. It’s a wasteland out there. Out here.
You can do nothing or anything or everything, and none of it
matters. You have to find something to really care about to
keep from running totally off the rails. A lot of magicians
never find it.”
Her voice was strangely urgent, almost angry. He was
trying to catch up to her.
“So you’re saying your parents didn’t.”
“No, they didn’t, despite their having had two children,
which would have given them a minimum of two good
options. Well, I think they might have cared about Charlie,
but when they lost him, they lost their way completely. And
here they are.”
“What about your mom and her fairy orchestras? She
seems pretty serious about them.”
“That’s just to annoy my dad. I’m not even sure they exist.”
Suddenly Alice rolled over on top of him, straddling him,
hands on his shoulders, pinning him down. Her hair hung
straight down at him in a shimmering curtain, tickling his
face and giving her the very authoritative appearance of a
goddess leaning down from the heavens.
“You have to promise me we’ll never be like them,
Quentin.” Their noses were almost touching. Her weight on
top of him was arousing, but her face was angry and
serious. “I know you think it’s going to be all quests and
dragons and fighting evil and whatever, like in Fillory. I know
that’s what you think. But it’s not. You don’t see it yet.
There’s nothing out there.
“So you have to promise me, Quentin. Let’s never get
like this, with these stupid hobbies nobody cares about.Just doing pointless things all day and hating each other
and waiting to die.”
“Well, you drive a hard bargain,” he said. “But okay. I
promise.”
“I’m serious, Quentin. It’s not going to be easy. It’s going
to be so much harder than you think. They don’t even know,
Quentin. They think they’re happy. That’s the worst part.”
She undid the drawstring on his pajama bottoms without
looking and jerked them down, still staring directly into his
eyes. Her robe was already open at the waist, and she had
nothing on under it. He knew she was saying something
important, but he wasn’t grasping it. He put his hands under
her robe, feeling her smooth back, the curve of her waist.
Her heavy breasts brushed against his chest. They would
always have magic. They would have it forever. So what—?
“Maybe they are happy,” he said. “Maybe this is just who
they are.”
“No, Quentin. They aren’t, and it isn’t.” She twined her
fingers into his hair and gripped it, hard, so that it hurt.
“God, you are such a child sometimes.”
They were moving together now, breathing hard. Quentin
was inside her, and they couldn’t talk anymore, except for
Alice just repeating:
“Promise me, Q. Promise me. Just promise.”
She said it angrily, insistently, over and over again, as if
he were arguing, as if he wouldn’t have agreed to
absolutely anything at that moment.GRADUATION
In a way it was a disaster of a vacation. They hardly even
went outside except for a few walks (undertaken at a brisk
trot) through the freeze-dried Urbana suburbs, so flat and
empty it felt like at any moment they could fall off into the
immense white sky. But in other ways it was perfect. It
brought Alice and Quentin closer together. It helped Quentin
understand why she was the way she was. They didn’t fight
once—if anything the terrifying counterexample of Alice’s
parents made them feel young and romantic by contrast.
And after the first week they’d finished all their homework
and were free to lie around and goof off. By the time two
weeks were up they were thoroughly stir crazy and ready to
start their last semester at Brakebills.
They’d heard almost nothing from the others since last
summer. Quen tin hadn’t really expected to. Of course he
was curious about what was going on in the outside world,
but he had the idea that Eliot and Josh and Janet were
busy ascending to some inconceivable new level of
coolness, as far above Brakebills as Brakebills was above
Brooklyn or Chesterton, and he would have felt let down if
they’d still had the time and inclination to bother keeping in
touch with him.
As far as he could deduce from their scattered reports,
they were all living together in an apartment in downtown
Manhattan. The only decent correspondent among them
was Janet, who every couple of weeks sent the cheesiest I
❤ New York postcard she could find. She wrote in all caps
and kept the punctuation to a minimum:
DEAR Q&A
WHAT IT IS WE 3 WENT TO CHINATOWN LAST
WEEK 2 LOOK FOR HERBS, ELIOT BOUGHT A
MONGOLIAN SPELLBOOK ITS IN MONGOLIANDUH BUT HE CLAIMS HE CAN READ IT BUT I
THINK IT’S MONGOLIAN PORNO. JOSH
BOUGHT A LITTLE GREEN BABY TURTLE HE
NAMED IT GAMERA AFTER THE MONSTER.
HE IS GROWING A BEARD JOSH NOT
GAMERA. U GUYS [the rest was in tiny, barely-
legible script overflowing vertically into the space
for the address] HAVE GOT TO GET HERE
BRAKEBILLS IS A SMALL SMALL POND AND
NYC IS THE OCEAN AND ELIOT IS DRINKING
LIKE A FISH STOP IT ELIOT STOP IT I KEEL
YOU FOR THIS I KEEL YOU 1000 TIMES . . .
[illegible]
SO MUCH LOVE
J ✶
Despite widespread popular resistance, or possibly
because of it, Dean Fogg entered Brakebills in an
international welters tournament, and Quentin traveled to
overseas magic schools for the first time, though he didn’t
see much of them beyond the welters court, and once in a
while a dining hall. They played in the emerald-green
courtyard of a medieval keep in the misty Carpathians, and
at a compound bushwhacked out of the seemingly endless
Argentine pampas. On Rishiri Island, off the northern coast
of Hokkaido, they played on the most beautiful welters court
Quentin had ever seen. The sand squares were a searing
white and perfectly scraped and leveled. The grass
squares were lime green and clipped to a regulation 12
mm. The water squares steamed darkly in the chilly air.
Frowning, uncannily humanoid monkeys watched them
play, clinging to wiggly pine trees, their bare pink faces
ringed with nimbi of snowy-white fur.
But Quentin’s world tour was cut short when, to Professor
Fogg’s acute embarrassment, the Brakebills team lost all
six of its first six matchups and exited the tournament. Theirperfect losing record was preserved forever when they
were crushed at home in the first round of the consolation
bracket by a pan-European team captained by a tiny, fiery,
curly-haired Luxembourgeoise on whom Quentin, along
with every other boy on the Brakebills team, and some of
the girls, developed an instant crush.
The welters season ended on the last day of March, and
suddenly, Quentin found himself staring at the end of his
Brakebills career across a perilously slender gap of only
two months of time. It was like he’d been wending his way
through a vast glittering city, zig-zagging through side
streets and wandering through buildings and haunted de
Chirico arcades and little hidden piazzas, the whole time
thinking that he’d barely scratched the surface, that he was
seeing just a tiny sliver of one little neighborhood. And then
suddenly he turned a corner and it turned out he’d been
through the whole city, it was all behind him, and all that was
left was one short street leading straight out of town.
Now the most insignificant things Quentin did felt
momentous, brimming over with anticipatory nostalgia.
He’d be passing by a window at the back of the House,
hurrying between classes, and a tiny movement would
catch his eye, a distant figure trudging across the Sea in a
Brakebills jacket, or a gawky topiary flamingo fussily
shedding the cap of snow on its little green head, and he
would realize that he would never see that particular
movement ever again, or if he did he would see it in some
future time as some unimaginably different person.
And then there were the other moments, when he was
violently sick of Brakebills and everything and everyone in
it, when it felt lame and pokey and claustrophobic and he
was desperate to get out. In four years he’d barely even set
foot off the Brakebills campus. My God, he was wearing a
school uniform. He’d essentially just spent four extra years
in high school! Students had a particular way of speaking at
Brakebills, an affected, overly precise, quasi-British diction
that came from all those vocal exercises, like they were just
freshly back from a Rhodes scholarship and wantedeverybody to know it. It made Quentin want to lay about him
with an edged weapon. And there was this obsession with
naming things. All the rooms at Brakebills had the same
identical desk, a broad-shouldered black cherrywood hulk
that must have been ordered up in bulk sometime in the
second half of the nineteenth century. It was honeycombed
with little drawers and cubbies and pigeonholes, and each
of those drawers and cubbies and pigeonholes had its own
precious little name. Every time Quentin heard somebody
drop a reference to “the Ink Chink” and “the Old Dean’s
Ear” he rolled his eyes at Alice. Sweet Jesus, are they
serious? We have got to get out of this place.
But where was he going to go, exactly? It was not
considered the thing to look panicked or even especially
concerned about graduation, but everything about the world
after Brakebills felt dangerously vague and under-thought to
Quentin. The bored, bedraggled specters of Alice’s parents
haunted him. What was he going to do? What exactly ?
Every ambition he’d ever had in his life had been realized
the day he was admitted to Brakebills, and he was
struggling to formulate a new one with any kind of practical
specificity. This wasn’t Fillory, where there was some
magical war to be fought. There was no Watcherwoman to
be rooted out, no great evil to be vanquished, and without
that everything else seemed so mundane and penny-ante.
No one would come right out and say it, but the worldwide
magical ecology was suffering from a serious imbalance:
too many magicians, not enough monsters.
It made it worse that he was the only one who seemed to
be bothered by it. Lots of students were already actively
networking with established magical organizations.
Surendra lectured anybody who would listen about a
consortium of wizards—whom he hadn’t actually heard from
yet, but he was pretty sure they’d basically guaranteed him
an internship—who spent their time at suborbital altitudes
keeping a weather eye out for stray asteroids and oversize
solar flares and other potential planetary-scale disasters.
Plenty of students went in for academic research. Alice waslooking at a post-graduate program in Glasgow, though the
idea of being separated didn’t particularly appeal to either
of them, nor did the idea of Quentin’s aimlessly tagging
along with her to Scotland.
It was considered chic to go undercover, to infiltrate
governments and think tanks and NGOs, even the military,
in order to get oneself into a position to influence real-world
affairs magically from behind the scenes. People devoted
years of their lives to it. And there were even more exotic
paths. A few magicians—Illusionists in particular—
undertook massive art projects, manipulating the northern
lights and things like that, decades-long enchantments that
might only ever have an audience of one. There was an
extensive network of war-gamers who staged annual global
conflicts over arbitrary tactical objectives, just for the fun of
it, sorcerers against sorcerers, in teams and free-for-all
battles royal. They played without safeguards, and it was
well known that once in a blue moon someone got killed.
But that was half the fun of it, the thrill.
And on and on, and it all sounded completely, horribly
plausible. Any one of a thousand options promised—
basically guaranteed—a rich, fulfilling, challenging future for
him. So why did Quentin feel like he was looking around
frantically for another way out? Why was he still waiting for
some grand adventure to come and find him? He was
drowning—why did he recoil whenever anybody reached
down to help him? The professors Quentin talked to about it
didn’t seem concerned at all. They didn’t get what the
problem was. What should he do? Why, anything he wanted
to!
Meanwhile Quentin and Alice plugged away at their
mandatory senior theses with steadily diminishing
enthusiasm. Alice was attempting to isolate an individual
photon and freeze it in place, halting its headlong light-
speed flight. She constructed an intricate trap for it out of
wood and glass, interwoven with a hellishly complex
spherical tangle of glowing indigo gramarye. But in the end
nobody was quite sure whether the photon was in there ornot, and they couldn’t figure out how to prove it one way or
the other. Privately Alice confessed to Quentin that she
wasn’t totally sure either, and she was genuinely hoping the
faculty could settle it one way or the other, because it was
driving her insane. After a week of increasingly fractious
debate that settled nothing, they voted to give Alice the
lowest possible passing grade and leave it at that.
For his project Quentin planned to fly to the moon and
back. Distance-wise he figured he could get there in a
couple of days, straight shot, and after his Antarctic
adventure he was pretty solid on personal warmth spells.
(Though they weren’t his Discipline either. He’d just about
given up on his Discipline.) And the idea had a certain
Romantic, lyrical savor to it. He took off from the Sea on a
bright, hot, humid spring morning, with Alice and Gretchen
and a couple of the more sycophantic new Physical Kids to
see him off. The protection spells formed a clear bubble
around him. Sounds became distorted, and the green lawn
and the smiling faces of his well-wishers took on a surreal
fish-eye warp. As he rose, the Earth gradually changed
from an infinite matte plain below him to a radiant, bounded
blue sphere. Overhead the stars came out and became
sharper and steelier and less twinkly.
Six hours into the trip his throat suddenly clamped shut,
and iron nails stabbed his eardrums. His eyeballs tried to
pry themselves out of their sockets. He had drifted off, and
his improvised space bubble had started to fail. Quentin
waved his arms like a frantic conductor, prestissimo, and
the air thickened and warmed again, but by then the fun had
gone out of the whole thing. Bouts of shivering and
wheezing and nervous laughter rattled him, and he couldn’t
calm down. Jesus, he thought, was there ever anything less
worth risking his life for than this? God knows how much
interstellar radiation he’d already absorbed. Space was full
of angry little particles.
He reversed course. He considered hiding out for a few
days and just pretending he’d gone to the moon. Maybe hecould score some moon dust off Lovelady, present it as
evidence. The air got warmer again. The sky grew lighter.
He relaxed as a cocktail of relief and shame filled him, one
generous part of each. The world spread out again
underneath him: the fractally detailed coastline, the blue
water textured like beaten metal, the beckoning claw of
Cape Cod.
The worst part turned out to be walking into the Great Hall
for dinner that night, two days early, with a sheepish yeah-I-
fucked-up grin plastered on his face, which was sunburned
a flaming red. After dinner he borrowed Alice’s key and
retreated to the Prefects’ Common Room, where he drank
too much sherry, sipping it alone in front of the darkened
window, even though all he could see was his own
reflection, picturing the Hudson River moving past in the
darkness, sluggish and swollen with cold spring rain. Alice
was studying up in her room. Everybody else was asleep
except for a lone weeknight party that was racketing on in
one wing, spinning off drunk students in pairs and groups.
When he was thoroughly smashed on self-pity and alcohol
and the dawn was threatening to leap up at him at any
moment, Quentin walked gingerly back to his bedroom,
climbing the spiral steps past what used to be Eliot’s room.
He weaved a little bit, swigging directly from the sherry
bottle, which he’d liberated on his way out.
He felt his intoxication already turning into a hangover,
that queasy neurological alchemy that usually happens
during sleep. His abdomen was overfull, swollen with
tainted viscera. People he’d betrayed came wandering out
from the place in his mind where they usually stayed. His
parents. James. Julia. Professor March. Amanda Orloff.
Even old dead Mr. What’s-his-name, his Princeton
interviewer. They all watched him dispassionately. He was
beneath their contempt.
He lay down on his bed with the light on. Wasn’t there a
spell for making yourself happy? Somebody must have
invented one. How could he have missed it? Why didn’t
they teach it? Was it in the library, a flying book flutteringjust out of reach, beating its wings against some high
window? He felt the bed slipping down and away, down
and away, like a film loop of a Stuka sheering down into an
attack run, over and over again. He’d been so young when
he first came here. He thought about that freezing day in
November when he’d taken the book from the lovely
paramedic, and the note had blown away into that dry,
twisted, frozen garden, and he’d gone blithely running after
it. Now he’d never know what it said. Had it contained all
the riches, all the good feeling that he was still somehow
missing, even after so much goodness had been heaped
upon him? Was it the secret revelation of Martin Chatwin,
the boy who had escaped into Fillory and never returned to
face the misery of this world? Because he was drunk, he
thought about his mother, and how she’d held him once
when he was little after he’d lost an action figure down a
storm drain, and he smooshed his red, smarting face into
his cool pillow and sobbed as if his heart were broken.
By then there were only two weeks left until graduation.
Classwork ground to a halt. The Maze was a vivid verdant
glowing green knot, the air was full of floaty little motes, and
siren-like pleasure craft came drifting down the river past
the boathouse, laden with oblivious sunbathers. All anybody
talked about was how great it would be when they could
party and sleep in and experiment with forbidden spells.
They kept looking at each other and laughing and slapping
each other on the back and shaking their heads. The
carousel was slowing down. The music had almost
stopped.
Pranks were organized. A decadent, last-days-of-
Pompeii vibe swept through the dorms. Somebody thought
up a new game involving dice and a lightly enchanted
mirror that was basically a magical version of strip poker.
Desperate, ill-advised attempts were made to sleep with
that one person with whom one had always secretly,hopelessly wanted to sleep.
The graduation ceremony started at six in the afternoon,
with the sky still heavy with fading golden light. An eleven-
course banquet was served in the dining hall. The nineteen
graduating Fifth Years regarded one another with awe,
feeling lost and alone at the long, empty dining table. Red
wine was served from bottles without labels; it was made,
Fogg revealed, using grapes from Brakebills’ own tiny
pocket vineyard, which Quentin had stumbled on in the fall
of his First Year. Traditionally the vineyard’s entire output
was drunk by the seniors at graduation dinner—had to be
drunk, Fogg stressed, hinting darkly at what would happen
if a single bottle was left unconsumed. It was a cabernet
sauvignon, and it was thin and sour, but they quaffed it
lustily anyway. Quentin declaimed a lengthy tribute to its
subtle expression of the unique Brakebills terroir . Toasts
were drunk to the memory of Amanda Orloff, and the
glasses hurled into the fireplace to ensure that no lesser
toast would ever be drunk from them. When the wind blew,
the candles flickered and dropped molten beeswax onto
the fresh white tablecloth.
Along with the cheese course they were each presented
with a silver bee pin, identical to the ones the prefects wore
—Quentin was at a loss to imagine any occasion on which
it would be even remotely appropriate to wear it—and a
heavy black two-toothed iron key that would permit them to
return to Brakebills if they ever needed to. School songs
were sung, and Chambers served Scotch, which Quentin
had never had before. He tipped his little tumbler of it from
side to side, watching the light drift through this mysterious
amber fluid. It was amazing that anything in liquid form
could taste that much like both smoke and fire.
He leaned over to Georgia and started to explain this
fascinating conundrum to her, but as he did so Fogg stood
up at the head of the table, strangely grave, dismissed
Chambers, and asked the Fifth Years to follow him
downstairs.This was unexpected. Downstairs meant the cellar,
where Quentin had almost never been in his whole time at
Brakebills—just once or twice to sneak a particularly
coveted bottle from the wine cellar, or when he and Alice
had been desperate for privacy. But now Professor Fogg
led them in a loose, bantering, occasionally singing flock
back through the kitchen, through a small, unassuming door
in the pantry, and down a flight of worn and dusty wooden
stairs that changed midflight into stone. They emerged into
a dark, earthy subbasement.
This wasn’t where Quentin had thought the party was
going. It wasn’t a party atmosphere at all. It was cool down
here and suddenly quiet. The floor was dirt, the ceilings
were low, and the walls were bumpy and unfinished. They
devoured sound. Voice by voice the chorus of a traditional
Brakebills song—an elaborately euphemistic number
entitled “The Prefect Has a Defect”—died away. There was
a grave but not unpleasant smell of damp soil.
Fogg stopped at what looked like a manhole cover
embedded in the dirt floor. It was brass and densely
inscribed with calligraphic writing. Oddly, it looked as shiny
and new as a freshly struck coin. The Dean picked up a
heavy manhole tool and, with an effort, levered up the brass
disk. It was two inches thick, and it took three of the Fifth
Years to roll it to one side.
“After you,” the Dean said, panting a little. He gestured
grandly at the inky black hole.
Quentin went first. He felt around blindly with his Scotch-
benumbed feet till he found an iron rung. It was like lowering
himself into warm black oil. The ladder took him and the
other graduates straight down into a circular chamber large
enough for all nineteen of them to stand upright in a circle,
which they did. Fogg came down last; they could hear him
screwing the manhole cover back into place behind them.
Then he descended, too, and with a crash he sent the
ladder retracting back up, like a fire escape. After that the
silence was absolute.“No point in losing our momentum,” Fogg said. He lit a
candle and gamely produced two fifths of bourbon from
somewhere and set them going in opposite directions
around the circle. Something about this gesture unnerved
Quentin. There was a certain amount of sanctioned alcohol
consumption at Brakebills—a fairly large amount, really—
but this was a bit much. There was something forced about
it.
Well, it was graduation. They weren’t students anymore.
They were grown-ups. Just peers, sharing a drink. In a
secret underground dungeon, in the middle of the night.
Quentin took his swig and passed it on.
Dean Fogg lit more candles in assorted brass
candlesticks, making a circle within their larger circle. They
couldn’t have been more than fifty yards down, but it felt like
they were a solid mile beneath the earth, entombed alive,
forgotten by the rest of the world.
“In case you’re wondering why we’re down here,” Fogg
said, “it’s because I wanted to get us outside the Brakebills
Protective Cordon. That’s a defensive magical barrier that
extends out from the House in all directions. That inscribed
brass hatch we opened was a gateway through it.”
The darkness swallowed his words as soon as he
uttered them.
“It’s a little unsettling, yes? But it’s appropriate, because
unlike me you’ll be spending the rest of your lives out here.
Most years, the point of coming down here is to scare you
with ghost stories about the outside world. In your case I
don’t think that will be necessary. You’ve witnessed
firsthand the destructive power that some magical entities
possess.
“It’s unlikely you’ll ever see anything as bad as what
happened on the day of the Beast. But remember that what
happened that day can happen again. Those of you who
were in the auditorium that day, especially, will carry the
mark of it forever. You will never forget the Beast, and youcan be sure it won’t forget you either.
“Forgive me if I lecture you, but it’s the last chance I’m
going to get.”
Quentin was sitting opposite Fogg in the circle—they had
all taken seats on the smooth stone floor—and his mild,
clean-shaven face floated in the darkness like an
apparition. Both bottles of whiskey reached Quentin
simultaneously, and he gamely took a sip from each, one in
each hand, and passed them on.
“Sometimes I wonder if man was really meant to discover
magic,” Fogg said expansively. “It doesn’t really make
sense. It’s a little too perfect, don’t you think? If there’s a
single lesson that life teaches us, it’s that wishing doesn’t
make it so. Words and thoughts don’t change anything.
Language and reality are kept strictly apart—reality is
tough, unyielding stuff, and it doesn’t care what you think or
feel or say about it. Or it shouldn’t. You deal with it, and you
get on with your life.
“Little children don’t know that. Magical thinking: that’s
what Freud called it. Once we learn otherwise we cease to
be children. The separation of word and thing is the
essential fact on which our adult lives are founded.
“But somewhere in the heat of magic that boundary
between word and thing ruptures. It cracks, and the one
flows back into the other, and the two melt together and
fuse. Language gets tangled up with the world it describes.
“I sometimes feel as though we’ve stumbled on a flaw in
the system, don’t you? A short circuit? A category error? A
strange loop? Is it possible that magic is knowledge that
would be better off forsworn? Tell me this: Can a man who
can cast a spell ever really grow up?”
He paused. No one answered. What the hell would they
say? It was a little late to be scolding them now that they’d
already completed their magical education.
“I have a little theory that I’d like to air here, if I may. Whatis it that you think makes you magicians?” More silence.
Fogg was well into rhetorical-question territory now anyway.
He spoke more softly. “Is it because you are intelligent? Is it
because you are brave and good? Is it because you’re
special?
“Maybe. Who knows. But I’ll tell you something: I think
you’re magicians because you’re unhappy. A magician is
strong because he feels pain. He feels the difference
between what the world is and what he would make of it. Or
what did you think that stuff in your chest was? A magician
is strong because he hurts more than others. His wound is
his strength.
“Most people carry that pain around inside them their
whole lives, until they kill the pain by other means, or until it
kills them. But you, my friends, you found another way: a
way to use the pain. To burn it as fuel, for light and warmth.
You have learned to break the world that has tried to break
you.”
Quentin’s attention wandered to the tiny glimmery points
of light here and there on the curved ceiling above them,
pricking out the shapes of constellations he didn’t
recognize, as if they were on another planet, seeing the
stars from an alien angle. Someone cleared his throat.
Fogg went on.
“But just in case that’s not enough, each one of you will
leave this room tonight with an insurance policy: a
pentagram tattooed on your back. Five-pointed star, nicely
decorative, plus it acts as a holding cell for a demon, a
small but rather vicious little fellow. Cacodemon, technically.
“They’re tough little scrappers, skin like iron. In fact, I think
they may be made of iron. I’ll give you each a password that
sets him free. Speak the password and he’ll pop out and
fight for you till he’s dead or till whoever’s giving you trouble
is.”
Fogg clapped his hands on his knees and looked atthem as if he’d just told them they’d all be receiving a year’s
supply of attractive and useful Brakebills stationery.
Georgia put up her hand tentatively.
“Is . . . is this optional? I mean, is anybody else besides
me disturbed by the idea of having an angry demon, you
know, trapped inside their skin?”
“If that bothers you, Georgia,” Fogg said curtly, “then you
should have gone to beauty school. Don’t worry, he’ll be
grateful as hell, so to speak, when you set him free. He’s
only good for one fight though, so pick your moment.
“That’s the other reason we’re down here, by the way.
Can’t conjure a cacodemon inside the Cordon.
“Why we need the bourbon, too, because this is going to
hurt like a bitch. Now, who’s first? Or shall we go
alphabetically?”
The next morning at ten there was a more conventional
graduation ceremony in the largest and grandest of the
lecture halls. It would be difficult to imagine a more
miserable and visibly hungover group of graduating
seniors. It was one of the rare occasions when parents
were allowed on campus, so no displays of magic, or
mentions of same, were allowed. Almost as bad as the
hangover was the pain from the tattoo. Quentin’s back felt
like it was crawling with hungry biting insects that had
stumbled on something especially delicious. He was
exquisitely conscious of his mother and father sitting a
dozen rows behind him.
Quentin’s memories of the night before were confused.
The Dean had summoned the demons himself, scribbling
concentric rings of sigils on the old stone floor with thick
chunks of white chalk. He worked quickly and surely, with
both hands at once. For the tattooing the guys took off their
shirts and jackets and lined up naked to the waist, as didthe girls, with varying degrees of modesty. Some of them
clutched their crumpled clothes over their chests. A few
exhibitionists stripped down proudly.
In the half darkness Quentin couldn’t see what Fogg was
using to draw on their skin, something slim and glinting. The
designs were intricate and had strange, shifting, optical
qualities. The pain was astonishing, like Fogg was flaying
the skin off their backs and dressing the wounds with salt.
But the pain was offset by the fear of what was coming, the
moment when he implanted the demon. When they were all
ready, Fogg built a low dome of loose glowing embers in
the center of the sigil rings, and the room got hot and
humid. Blood and smoke and sweat were in the air, and an
orgiastic fever. When it was the first girl’s turn—going
alphabetically that was Alsop, Gretchen—Fogg donned an
iron gauntlet and rummaged around in the coals till he got a
grip on something.
The red glow lit up Fogg’s face from below, and maybe it
was just the distortions of memory and alcohol, but Quentin
thought he saw something there that he hadn’t seen since
his first day at Brakebills—something drunken and cruel
and unfatherly. When he had hold of what he was looking
for he heaved, and out of the embers it came: a demon,
trailing sparks, heavy and dog-size and pissed off. In the
same motion he crammed it wriggling into Gretchen’s
slender back; he had to go back and stuff one flailing,
sticking-out limb back in. She gasped, her whole body
tensed, like she’d had freezing water dumped over her.
And then she just looked puzzled, twisting to look over her
shoulder, forgetting for a second and letting everyone see
her slight, pale-nippled breasts. Because as Quentin
discovered when it was his turn, there was no sensation at
all.
It all felt like a dream now, though of course the first thing
Quentin did that morning was check out his back in the
mirror. There it was, a huge five-pointed star in thick black
outline, raw and red and slightly off center to the left; he
supposed it must be positioned more or less exactly withhis heart at its center. Segments of the star were dense
with fine squiggly black writing and smaller stars and
crescent moons and other less easily identifiable icons—
he looked like he hadn’t been so much tattooed as
notarized, or stamped like a passport. Tired, achy, and
hungover as he was, he smiled at it in the mirror. The
overall effect was completely badass.
When it was all over, they shuffled out of the auditorium
into the old hallway. If they’d had caps, they might have
thrown them in the air, but they didn’t. There was a low hum
of conversation, a couple of whoops, but that was really it; it
was over, there was nothing else. If they hadn’t been
graduated last night, they sure were now. They could go
anywhere, do anything they wanted. This was it: the big
send-off.
Alice and Quentin drifted out a side door and wandered
over to a huge spreading oak, swinging their held hands
between them. There was no wind. The sunlight was too
bright. Quentin’s head throbbed. His parents were in the
vicinity, and he’d have to go look for them in a second. Or
maybe they could come looking for him for once in their
lives. There would be parties tonight, he supposed, but he
was already pretty much partied out. He didn’t feel like
packing up his things, didn’t feel like going back to
Chesterton, or Brooklyn, or anywhere else for that matter.
He didn’t feel like staying, and he didn’t feel like going. He
stole a glance at Alice. She looked peaked. He performed
a mental search for the love he was accustomed to feel for
her and found it strangely absent. If there was anything he
wanted at that moment it was to be alone. But he wasn’t
going to get that.
These were bad thoughts, but he couldn’t or wouldn’t
stop the flow, stanch the cerebral hemorrhage. Here he
was, a freshly licensed and bonded and accredited
magician. He had learned to cast spells, seen the Beast
and lived, flown to Antarctica on his own two wings, and
returned naked by the sheer force of his magical will. Hehad an iron demon in his back. Who would ever have
thought he could do and have and be all those things and
still feel nothing at all? What was he missing? Or was it
him? If he wasn’t happy even here, even now, did the flaw
lie in him? As soon as he seized happiness it dispersed
and reappeared somewhere else. Like Fillory, like
everything good, it never lasted. What a terrible thing to
know.
I got my heart’s desire, he thought, and there my troubles
began.
“We have our whole lives ahead of us and all I want to do
is take a nap,” Alice said.
There was a soft sound behind them. A soap bubble
popping, an intake of breath, a wing beat.
Quentin turned around, and they were all there. Josh with
a fringe of blond beard that made him look more than ever
like a genial smiling abbot. Janet had gotten her nose
pierced, and probably other parts of her. Eliot wore
sunglasses, which he had never done at Brakebills, and a
shirt of amazing, indescribable perfection. There was
somebody else with them, too, a stranger: a serious,
slightly older man, tall and darkly, bookishly handsome.
“Get your stuff together,” Josh said. He grinned even
more widely and spread out his arms like a prophet. “We’re
going to take you away from all this.”BOOK IIMANHATTAN
Two months later it was November. Not Brakebills
November, real November—Quentin had to keep
reminding himself that they were on regular real-world time
now. He lolled his temple against the cold apartment
window. Far below he could see a neat little rectangular
park where the trees were red and brown. The grass was
threadbare, with dirt patches, like a worn-out rug with the
canvas backing showing through the woven surface.
Quentin and Alice lay on their backs on a wide, candy-
striped daybed by the window, limply holding hands,
looking and feeling like they’d just washed ashore on a raft
that had been gently, limply deposited by the surf on the
beach of a silent deserted island. The lights were off, but
milky-white afternoon sunlight filtered into the room through
half-closed blinds. The remains of a game of chess, a
sloppy, murderous draw, lay on a nearby coffee table.
The apartment was undecorated and barely furnished
except for an eclectic collection they’d trucked in as the
need arose. They were squatting: a tiresomely complex
magical arrangement had allowed them to secure this
particular scrap of underutilized Lower East Side real
estate while its rightful owners were otherwise occupied.
A deep, thick silence hung in the still air, like stiff white
sheets on a clothesline. Nobody spoke, and nobody had
spoken for about an hour, and nobody felt the need to
speak. They were in lotus-land.
“What time is it?” Alice said finally.
“Two. Past two.” Quentin turned his head to look at the
clock. “Two.”
The buzzer rang. Neither of them moved.
“It’s probably Eliot,” Quentin said.“Are you going over early?”
“Yes. Probably.”
“You didn’t tell me you were going early.”
Quentin sat up slowly, using just his stomach muscles, at
the same time extracting his arm from beneath Alice’s
head.
“I’m probably going early.”
He buzzed Eliot in. They were going to a party.
It was only two months since graduation, but already
Brakebills seemed like a lifetime ago—yet another lifetime,
Quentin thought, reflecting world-wearily that at the age of
twenty-one he was already on his third or fourth lifetime.
When he left Brakebills for New York, Quentin had
expected to be knocked down and ravished by the sheer
gritty reality of it all: going from the jeweled chrysalis of
Brakebills to the big, messy, dirty city, where real people
led real lives in the real world and did real work for real
money. And for a couple of weeks he had been. It was
definitely real, if by real you meant non-magical and
obsessed with money and amazingly filthy. He had
completely forgotten what it was like to be in the mundane
world all the time. Nothing was enchanted: everything was
what it was and nothing more. Every conceivable surface
was plastered with words—concert posters, billboards,
graffiti, maps, signs, warning labels, alternate-side parking
regulations—but none of it meant anything, not the way a
spell did. At Brakebills every square inch of the House,
every brick, every bush, every tree, had been marinated in
magic for centuries. Here, out in the world, raw unmodified
physics reigned, and mundanity was epidemic. It was like a
coral reef with the living vital meaning bleached out of it,
leaving nothing but an empty colored rock behind. To a
magician’s eyes, Manhattan looked like a desert.
Though like a desert, it did have some stunted, twisted
traces of life, if you dug for them. There was a magicalculture in New York outside the handful of Brakebills-
educated elite who resided there, but it existed on the city’s
immigrant margins. The older Physical Kids—a name they
had left behind at Brakebills and would never use again—
gave Quentin and Alice the outer-borough subway tour. In a
windowless second-story café on Queens Boulevard, they
watched Kazakhs and Hasidim construe number theory.
They ate dumplings with Korean mystics in Flushing and
watched modern-day Isis worshippers rehearse Egyptian
street hexes in the back of a bodega on Atlantic Avenue.
Once they took the ferry across to Staten Island, where they
stood around a dazzlingly blue swimming pool sipping gin
and tonics at a conclave of Filipino shamans.
But after a few weeks the energy for those educational
field trips had all but evaporated. There was just too much
to distract them, and nothing particularly urgent to be
distracted from. Magic would always be there, and it was
hard work, and he’d been doing it for a long time. What
Quentin needed to catch up on was life. New York’s
magical underground may have been limited, but the
number and variety of its drinking establishments was
prodigious. And you could get drugs here—actual drugs!
They had all the power in the world, and no work to do, and
nobody to stop them. They ran riot through the city.
Alice didn’t find all this quite as exciting as Quentin did.
She had put off the kind of civil service appointment or
research apprenticeship that usually ensnared serious-
minded Brakebills students so she could stay in New York
with Quentin and the others, but inspite of that she showed
signs of actual unfeigned academic curiosity, which caused
her to spend a good part of every day studying magic
instead of, for example, recovering from having gone out
the night before. Quentin felt mildly ashamed for not
following her example, enough that he even made noises
about relaunching his failed lunar expedition, but not so
much that he actually did anything about it. (Alice cycled
through a sequence of space travel- related nicknames for
him—Scotty, Major Tom, Laika—until his lack of progressbegan to make them more humiliating than funny.) He felt
entitled to blow off steam and shake off the Brakebills pixie
dust and generally “live.” And Eliot felt that way, too (“Ain’t
that why we got livers ?” he said in his exaggerated
Oregoner accent). It wasn’t a problem. He and Alice were
just different people. Isn’t that what made it interesting?
At any rate Quentin felt interesting. He felt fascinating.
For the first year after graduation his financial needs were
taken care of by an immense secret slush fund, amassed
covertly over the centuries through magically augmented
investing, that yielded a regular allowance for all newly
minted magicians who needed it. After four cloistered
years at Brakebills, cash was like a magic all its own: a way
of turning one thing into another thing, producing something
out of nothing, and he worked that magic all over town.
Money people thought he was artsy, artsy people thought
he was money, and everybody thought he was clever and
good-looking, and he got invited everywhere: charity social
events, underground poker clubs, dive bars, rooftop
parties, mobile all-night in-limo narcotics binges. He and
Eliot passed themselves off as brothers, and their double
act was the hit of the season. It was the revenge of the
nerds.
Night after night Quentin would return home toward dawn,
alone, deposited in front of his building by a solemn solitary
cab like a hearse painted yellow, the street awash with blue
light—the delicate ultrasound radiance of the embryonic
day. Coming down off coke or ecstasy, his body felt
strange and heavy, like a golem fashioned from some ultra-
dense star-metal that had fallen from the sky and cooled
and congealed into human form. He felt so heavy that he
could break through the brittle pavement any second, and
plunge down into the sewers, unless he placed his feet
gently and precisely in the center of each sidewalk square
in turn.
Standing alone amid the still, stately mess of their
apartment, his heart would brim over with regret. He felt like
his life had gone terribly wrong. He shouldn’t have gone out.He should have stayed home with Alice. But he would have
been so bored if he’d stayed home! And she would have
been bored if she’d come out! What were they going to do?
They couldn’t go on like this. He felt so grateful to her for not
having seen the excesses he had so eagerly indulged in,
the drugs he had ingested, the manic flirting and pawing in
which he had engaged.
Then he would take off his clothes, which reeked of
cigarette smoke, like a toad shedding its skin, and Alice
would stir sleepily in the sheets and sit up, the white sheet
slipping down off her heavy breasts. She would lean
against him, their backs against the cool white wooden curl
of their sleigh bed, not speaking, and they would watch as
the dawn came up and a garbage truck moved haltingly
down the block, its pneumatic biceps gleaming as it
greedily consumed whatever its overalled attendants flung
into it, ingesting what the city had expectorated. And
Quentin would feel a lofty pity for the garbagemen, and for
all the straights and civilians. He wondered what they could
possibly have in their uncharmed lives that made them think
they were worth living.
He heard Eliot try the door, find it locked, and fumble
around for his key; Eliot shared an apartment with Janet in
Soho, but he was over at Quentin and Alice’s so much that
it was easier just to give him his own key. Quentin strolled
around the open-plan apartment, half-heartedly
straightening up, snapping up condom wrappers and
underwear and decaying food and depositing them in the
trash. It was a beautiful place in a converted factory, all
wide-planked, thickly varnished wood floors and arched
warehouse windows, but it had seen more considerate
tenants. He’d been surprised to discover when they moved
in together that while he was an indifferent housekeeper,
Alice was the true slob of the relationship.She retreated to the bedroom to get dressed. She was
still in her nightgown.
“Morning,” Eliot said, although it wasn’t. He loitered just
inside the rolling metal freight door, wearing a long
overcoat and a sweater that had been expensive before
moths got to it.
“Hey,” Quentin said. “Just let me grab my coat.”
“It’s freezing out there. Is Alice coming?”
“I didn’t get that impression. Alice?” He raised his voice.
“Alice?”
There was no answer. Eliot had already faded back out
into the hall. He didn’t seem to have much patience for
Alice lately, as somebody who didn’t share his rigorous
dedication to pleasure-seeking. Quentin supposed her
unfussy diligence reminded him unpleasantly of the future
he was ignoring. Quentin knew it had that effect on him.
He hesitated on the threshold, torn between conflicting
loyalties. She would probably be grateful for some quiet
time to study.
“I think she’s coming later,” Quentin said. He called in the
direction of the bedroom: “Okay! Bye! I’ll see you there!”
There was no answer.
“Bye Mom!” Eliot yelled.
The door closed.
Like everything else, Eliot was different in New York. At
Brakebills he had always been supremely aloof and self-
sufficient. His personal charm and odd appearance and
talent for magic had raised him up and set him apart. But
since Quentin had joined him in Manhattan, the balance of
power between them had shifted somehow. Eliot hadn’t
survived transplantation unscathed; he no longer floated
easily above the fray. His humor was more arch and bitterand childish than Quentin remembered. He seemed to be
getting younger as Quentin got older. He needed Quentin
more, and he resented Quentin for that. He hated to be left
out of anything, and he hated to be included in anything. He
spent more time than he should have on the roof of his
apartment building smoking his Merits and God knows
what else—there wasn’t much you couldn’t find if you had
the money, and they had the money. He was getting too
thin. He was depressed and turned nasty when Quentin
tried to jolly him out of it. When annoyed he was fond of
saying, “God, it’s amazing I’m not a dipsomaniac” and then
correcting himself: “Oh, wait, that’s right . . .” It had been
funny the first time. Sort of.
At Brakebills Eliot had started drinking at dinnertime,
earlier on weekends, which was fine, because all the
upperclassmen drank at dinner, though not all of them
bartered their desserts for extra glasses of wine the way
Eliot did. In Manhattan, with no professors watching over
them, and no classes to be sober for, Eliot was rarely
without a glass of something in his hand from one in the
afternoon on. Usually it was something relatively innocuous,
white wine or Campari or a big dilute tumbler of bourbon
and soda clunking with ice. But still. Once when Eliot was
nursing a stubborn cold, Quentin remarked lightly that
maybe he should consider something more wholesome
than a vodka tonic with which to chase his plastic jigger of
DayQuil.
“I’m sick, I’m not dead,” Eliot snapped. And that was that.
At least one of Eliot’s talents had survived graduation: he
was still a tireless seeker-out of obscure and wonderful
bottles of wine. He was not yet such a lush that he’d
abandoned his snobbishness. He went to tastings and
chatted up importers and wine-store owners with a zeal that
he mustered for nothing else. Once every few weeks, when
he had accumulated a dozen or so bottles of which he was
especially proud, Eliot would announce that they were
having a dinner party. It was one such dinner party that heThey lavished a ridiculous amount of effort on these
parties, all out of proportion to any actual fun they might get
in return. The venue was always Eliot and Janet’s Soho
apartment, a vast prewar warren with an implausible
profusion of bedrooms, a set ripe for a French farce. Josh
was head chef, with Quentin assisting as apprentice chef
and kitchen runner. Eliot acted as sommelier, of course.
Alice’s contribution was to stop reading long enough to eat.
Janet dressed the set: she formulated the night’s dress
code, chose the music, and hand-wrote and illustrated
amazingly beautiful one-off menus. She also confabulated
various surreal and sometimes controversial cen terpieces.
The theme of tonight’s party was Miscegenation, and Janet
had promised—over objections aesthetic, moral, and
ornithological—to deliver Leda and the Swan staged as a
pair of magically animated ice sculptures. They would
copulate until they melted.
As with all such evenings, the cleverness of the conceit
became annoying somewhere around the middle of the
afternoon before the party actually started. Quentin had
found a grass skirt at an antique store, which he planned to
pair with a tuxedo shirt and jacket, but the skirt was so
scratchy that he gave up on it. He couldn’t think of another
idea, so he spent the rest of the afternoon brooding and
dodging Josh, who had spent the past week researching
recipes that included violently disparate ingredients
wedded together—sweet and savory, black and white,
frozen and molten, Eastern and Western—and was now
frantically slamming oven and cabinet doors and making
him taste things and sniping at him over the pastry island.
Alice arrived at five thirty, and Quentin and Josh both
dodged her as well. By the time the party started everybody
was drunk and starving and irritable.
But then, as sometimes happens with dinner parties,
everything became mysteriously, spontaneously perfect
again. The fabric knitted itself back together. The day
before, Josh, who by this time had shaved off his beard(“It’s like taking care of a damn pet”), announced that he
was bringing a date, which put added pressure on
everybody to get their shit together. As the sun set over the
Hudson, and sunbeams tinted a delicate rose by their
passage through the atmosphere over New Jersey lanced
through the apartment’s huge common room, and Eliot
handed around Lillet cocktails (Lillet and champagne
layered over a velvet hammer of vodka) in chilled martini
glasses, and Quentin served miniature sweet-and-sour
lobster rolls, everybody suddenly seemed—or maybe they
actually were?—wise and funny and good-looking..
Josh had refused to reveal the identity of his date in
advance, so when the elevator doors opened—they had the
entire floor—Quentin had no idea that he would recognize
her: it was the girl from Luxembourg, the curly-haired
captain of the European team that had administered the
deathblow to his welters career. It turned out (they told the
story collaboratively, a set piece they’d evidently been
working on) that Josh had bumped into her in a subway
station where she was trying to bewitch a vending machine
into adding money to her Metrocard. Her name was Anaïs,
and she wore a pair of snakeskin pants so ravishing that
nobody asked her what if anything they had to do with the
theme. She had blond ringlets and a tiny pointy nose, and
Josh was obviously besotted with her. So was Quentin. He
felt a wild pang of jealousy.
He barely talked to Alice all night anyway, what with
ducking in and out of the kitchen warming and plating and
serving things. By the time he emerged with the entrées—
pork chops dusted with bitter chocolate—it was dark, and
Richard was making a speech about magical theory. The
wine and the food and the music and the candles were
almost enough to make what he was saying seem
interesting.
Richard, of course, was the mysterious stranger who
turned up with the other former Physical Kids on graduation
day. He was a one-time Physical Kid, too, of the generation
that preceded Eliot and Josh and Janet, and of them all hewas the only one who had actually entered the world of
respectable professional wizardry. Richard was tall, with a
big head, dark hair, square shoulders, and a big square
chin, and he was handsome in a Frankensteinian way. He
was friendly enough to Quentin—firm handshake, lots of
eye contact with his big, dark eyes. In conversation he liked
to address Quentin directly as “Quentin” a lot, which made
him feel kind of like they were having a job interview.
Richard was employed by the trust that managed the
collective financial assets of the magical community, which
were vast. He was, in a quiet way, an observant Christian.
They were rare among magicians.
Quentin tried to like Richard, since everybody else did,
and it would just be simpler. But he was so damn earnest.
He wasn’t stupid, but he completely lacked any sense of
humor—jokes derailed him, so that the whole conversation
had to stop while somebody, usually Janet, explained what
everybody else was laughing at, and Richard knitted his
thick Vulcan eyebrows in consternation at his companions’
merely human foibles. And Janet, who could usually be
counted on to ruthlessly flense anybody who made the
mistake of taking anything seriously, Janet waited on
Richard hand and foot! It annoyed Quentin to think that she
might look up to Richard the same way he had once looked
up to the older Physical Kids. He had the definite sense
that Janet must have slept with Richard once or twice back
at Brakebills. It was entirely possible that they slept together
once in a while now.
“Magic,” Richard announced slowly, flushed, “is the tools.
Of the Maker.” He almost never drank, and two glasses of
viognier had put him well over his limit. He looked first left
and then right to make sure the whole table was listening.
What a fatuous ass. “There’s no other way of looking at it.
We are dealing with a scenario where there is a Person
who built the house, and then He left.” He rapped the table
with one hand to celebrate this triumph of reason. “And
when He left, He left His tools lying around in the garage.
Then we found them, and we picked them up, and westarted making guesses about how they work. Now we’re
learning to use them. And that’s magic.”
“There are so many things wrong with that I don’t even
know where to start,” Quentin distinctly heard himself say.
“So? Start.”
Quentin put down the food he was carrying. He had no
idea what he was about to say, but he was happy to be
publicly contradicting Richard.
“Okay, well, first of all, there’s a huge scale problem.
Nobody’s building universes here. We’re not even building
galaxies or solar systems or planets. You need cranes and
bulldozers to build a house. If there is a ‘Maker,’ which I
frankly don’t see much evidence for, that’s what He had.
What we’ve got are hand tools. Black and Decker. I don’t
see how you get from there to what you’re talking about.”
“If it’s a question of scale,” Richard said, “I don’t see that
as insurmountable. Maybe we’re just not”—he searched in
his wine glass for the right metaphor—“we’re not plugging
our tools into the right socket. Maybe there’s a much bigger
socket—”
“I think if you’re talking about electricity,” Alice put in, “you
have to talk about where energy comes from.”
That’s what I should have said, Quentin thought. Alice
relished theoretical arguments as much as Richard, and
she was much better at them.
“Any heating spell, you’re demonstrably drawing energy
from one place and putting it in another. If somebody
created the universe, they actually created energy from
somewhere. They didn’t just push it around.”
“Fine, but if—”
“Plus, magic just doesn’t feel like a tool,” Alice went on.
“Can you imagine how boring it would be if casting a spell
were like turning on an electric drill? But it’s not. It’s
irregular and beautiful. It’s not an artifact, it’s somethingelse, something organic. It feels like a grown thing, not a
made thing.”
She looked radiant in a silky black sheath that she knew
he liked. Where had she been all night? He seemed to
keep forgetting what a treasure she was.
“I bet it’s alien tech,” Josh said. “Or fourth-dimensional,
like, weather or something. From a direction we can’t even
see. Or we’re in some kind of really high-tech multiplayer
video game.” He snapped his fingers. “So that’s why Eliot’s
always humping my corpse.”
“Not necessarily,” Richard finally broke in. He was still
processing Alice’s argument. “It’s not necessarily irregular.
Or I would argue that it partakes of a higher regularity, a
higher order, that we haven’t been allowed to see.”
“Yeah, that’s the answer.” Eliot was visibly drunk. “That’s
the answer to everything. God save us from Christian
magicians. You sound just like my parents. That is just
exactly what my ignorant Christian parents would say. Just,
if it doesn’t fit with your theory, well, that’s just because, oh,
it actually does, but God is mysterious, so we can’t see it.
Because we’re so sinful. That’s so fucking easy .”
He fished around in the remnants of Janet’s centerpiece
with a long serving fork. Leda and the Swan were
indistinguishable from each other now, two rounded
Brancusi forms still gamely humping away as a tide of slush
rose up to drown them.
“Well, heck, we oughta call ourselves the Meta -Physical
Kids,” Josh said.
“And who the fuck is this ‘Maker’ you’re talking about?”
Eliot snarled. He was getting vehement and not listening.
“Are you talking about God? Because if you’re talking
about God, just say God.”
“All right,” Richard said placidly. “Let’s say God.”
“Is this a moral God? Is He going to punish us for usingHis holy magic? For being bad little magicians? Is He
[“She!” Janet shouted] going to come back and give us a
good spanking because we got into the garage and played
with Daddy’s power tools?
“Because that is just stupid. It’s just stupid, and it’s
ignorant. No one gets punished for anything. We do
whatever we want, and that’s all we do, and nobody stops
us, and nobody cares.”
“If He left us His tools, He left them for a reason,” Richard
said.
“And I suppose you know what that is.”
“What’s the next wine, Eliot?” Janet asked brightly. She
always kept a cool head in difficult moments, maybe
because she tended to be so out of control so much of the
rest of the time. She looked unusually ravishing tonight, too,
in a slinky red tunic that made it to her midthigh, barely,
before it gave out. The kind of thing Alice would never wear.
Couldn’t, not with her figure.
Both Richard and Eliot seemed to want to extend the
fight by another round, but Eliot, with an effort of will,
allowed himself to be diverted.
“An excellent question.” Eliot pressed his hands to his
temples. “I am receiving a divine vision from the Almighty
Maker of . . . an exquisitely expensive small-batch bourbon .
. . which God—or I’m sorry, the Makeress —has
commanded me to render unto you forthwith.”
He stood up unsteadily and lurched in the direction of the
kitchen.
Quentin found him sitting red-faced and sweating on a
stool by an open window. Icy air was pouring in, but Eliot
didn’t seem to notice. He stared out unblinking at the city,
which receded in perspectival lines of lights fanning out into
the blackness. He said nothing. He didn’t move as Quentin
helped Richard manage the individual baked Alaskas—the
trick, Richard explained, in his well-practiced explainingtone, was to make sure the meringue, an excellent heat
insulator, formed a complete seal over the ice-cream core
—and Quentin wondered if they’d lost Eliot for the evening.
It wouldn’t be the first time he drank himself out of
contention. But a few minutes later he rallied and trailed
them back into the dining room with a slender, oddly
shaped bottle sloshing with amber-colored whiskey.
Things were winding down. Everyone was treading
carefully so as not to trigger another outburst from Eliot or
another sermon from Richard. Not long afterward Josh left
to take Anaïs home, and Richard retired of his own accord,
leaving Quentin, Janet, and Eliot to preside woozily over the
empty bottles and crumpled napkins. One of the candles
had charred a hole in the tablecloth. Where was Alice? Had
she gone home? Or crashed in one of the spare rooms?
He tried her cell. No answer.
Eliot had dragged a pair of ottomans over to the table.
He reclined on them Roman-style, though they were too
low, so he had to reach up to get his drink, and all Quentin
could see of him was his groping hand. Janet lay down, too,
spooned up contentedly behind him.
“Coffee?” she asked.
“Cheese,” Eliot said. “Do we have cheese? I need
cheese.”
On cue Peggy Lee wandered through the opening verse
of “Is That All There Is?” on the stereo. Which would be
worse, Quentin wondered. If Richard was right, and there
was an angry moral God, or if Eliot was right, and there was
no point at all? If magic was created for a purpose, or if
they could do whatever they wanted with it? Something like
a panic attack came over him. They were really in trouble
out here. There was nothing to hang on to. They couldn’t go
on like this forever.
“There’s a Morbière in the kitchen,” he said. “It was
supposed go with the theme—you know, the two layers, the
morning milking, the night milking . . .”“Yeah, yeah, we get it,” Janet said. “Fetch, Q. Go on.”
“I’ll go,” Eliot said, but instead of standing up he just
rolled weakly off the couch and fell on the floor. His head
made an ominously loud bonk as it hit the parquet.
But he was laughing as Quentin and Janet picked him
up, Quentin getting his shoulders and Janet taking his feet,
all thoughts of cheese extinguished, and maneuvered him
out of the dining room and in the direction of his bedroom.
On their way out the door Eliot’s head hit the door frame
with another loud bonk, and then it was just too absolutely
hilarious, and they all started laughing, and they laughed
until they were completely useless, and Janet dropped his
feet, and Quentin dropped his shoulders, and his head
bonked on the floor again, and by this time it was a
thousand times more funny than the first two times.
It took Quentin and Janet twenty minutes to get Eliot
down the hall to his bedroom, lurching heavily against the
walls with their arms around each other as if they were
struggling down a flooded steerage-level corridor on the
Titanic . The world had become smaller and somehow
lighter—nothing meant anything, but what was meaning
anyway but a burden that weighed them down? Eliot kept
saying he was fine, and Quentin and Janet kept insisting
they had to pick him up. Janet announced that she had
peed herself, actually literally peed herself, she was
laughing so hard. As they passed Richard’s door Eliot
began a loud speech on the order of, “I am the mighty
Maker, and I now bequeath to you My Holy Power Tools,
because I am too fucking drunk to use them anymore, and
good luck to you, because when I get up tomorrow they had
better be exactly where I left them, exactly, even My . . . no,
especially My belt sander, because I am going to be so
fucking hungover tomorrow, anybody who fucks with My belt
sander is going to get a taste of My belt. And it won’t taste
good. At all.”
Finally they heaved him onto his bed and tried to make
him drink water and pulled up the covers over his chest. Itcould have been the sheer domesticity of it—it was as if
Eliot were their beloved son, whom they were lovingly
tucking in for the night—or maybe it was just boredom, that
powerful aphrodisiac, which had never been entirely out of
sight even during the party’s best moments, but if he was
honest with himself Quentin had known for at least twenty
minutes, even as they were wrestling Eliot down the hall,
that he was going to take Janet’s dress off as soon as he
had half a chance.
Quentin woke up slowly the next morning. So slowly, over
such a long time, that he was never really sure he’d been
asleep at all. The bed felt unstable and disconcertingly
floaty, and it was weird with two other naked people there.
They kept bumping into each other and inadvertently
touching and pulling away and then feeling self-conscious
about having pulled away.
At first, in the first flush of it, he felt no regret about what
happened. It was what you were supposed to do. He was
living life to the fullest. Getting drunk and giving in to
forbidden passions. That was the stuff of life. Wasn’t that
the lesson of the foxes? If Alice had any blood in her veins
she would have joined them! But no. She had to go to bed
early. She was just like Richard. Well, welcome to life in the
grown-up magical world, Alice. Magic wasn’t going to solve
everything. Couldn’t she see that? Couldn’t she see that
they were all dying, that everything was futile, that the only
thing to do was to live and drink and fuck whatever and
whomever while you still could? She herself had warned
him of that, right there in her parents’ house in Illinois. And
she’d been right!
And then after a while it seemed like a debatable thing—
you could really make the case both ways, it was a coin-flip.
And then it was an unfortunate lapse, an indiscretion, still
within the bounds of the forgivable, but definitely a lowpoint. Not a personal best. And then it was a major
indiscretion, a bad mistake, and then, in the last act of the
strip tease, it revealed itself to be what it truly was: a
terrible, really awful, hurtful betrayal. At some point during
this slow, incremental fall from grace Quentin became
aware of Alice sitting at the foot of the bed, just her back,
facing away from where he and Janet and Eliot lay, resting
her chin in her hands. Periodically he imagined that it was
just a dream, that she hadn’t been there at all. But to be
honest he was pretty sure she had. She hadn’t looked like a
figment. She’d been fully dressed. She must have been up
for a while.
Around nine o’clock the room was full of morning light
and Quen tin couldn’t pretend to be asleep anymore. He sat
up. He wasn’t wearing a shirt, and he couldn’t remember
where his shirt was. He wasn’t wearing anything else either.
He would have given anything right then just to have a shirt
and some underwear.
With his bare feet on the hardwood floor he felt strangely
insubstantial. He couldn’t understand, couldn’t quite believe
what he’d done. It just didn’t seem like him. Maybe Fogg
was right, maybe magic had inhibited his moral
development. Something must have. Maybe that was why
he was such a shit. But there had to be a way he could
make Alice understand how sorry he was. He dragged a
blanket off Eliot’s bed—Janet stirred and complained
sleepily, then went back to her dreamless, guiltless sleep—
and wrapped it around himself and padded out into the
silent apartment. The dinner table was like a shipwreck.
The kitchen looked like a crime scene. Their little planet
was ruined, and there was nowhere left for him to stand.
Quentin thought about Professor Mayakovsky, how he’d
reversed time, fixed the glass globe, brought the spider
back to life. That would be a pretty nice thing to be able to
do right about now.
When the elevator doors pinged open, Quentin thought it
must be Josh coming back from a successful night with
Anaïs. Instead it was Penny, pale and breathing hard fromrunning and so excited he could barely contain himself.PENNY ’S STORY
He had a new mohawk, a proud iridescent green ruff an
inch wide and three inches high, like the crest of a
centurion’s helmet. He had also gained weight—he looked,
oddly, younger and softer than he had at Brakebills: less
like a lone Iroquois warrior and more like an overfed white
suburban gangsta. But it was still Penny who was catching
his breath on the Oriental rug and looking around at
everything like a curious, judgmental rabbit. He wore a
black leather jacket with chrome spikes on it, faded black
jeans, and a grubby white T-shirt. Jesus, Quentin thought.
Do they even have punks anymore? He must be the last
one in New York.
Penny sniffed and wiped his nose on his sleeve. Neither
of them spoke. Quentin knew enough to know that Penny
would never stoop to petty social pleasantries like saying
hello and asking how he’d been and explaining what the
hell he was doing here. Just this once Quentin was grateful.
He didn’t know if he could face it.
“How’d you get in here?” Quentin croaked. His mouth
was parched.
“Your doorman was asleep. You should really fire him.”
“It’s not my doorman.” He cleared his throat laboriously.
“You must have cast something.”
“Just Cholmondeley’s Stealth.” Penny gave it the correct
English pronunciation: Chumley’s .
“Eliot has a ward on this whole floor. I helped him set it
up. Plus you need a key for the elevator.”
“We’ll need to set a new ward. I unpicked it on the way
up.”
“Fucking—Okay, first, who’s we? We who?” Quentin
said. At this moment his dearest wish would have been justa moment’s grace to immerse his face in a sinkful of warm
water. And maybe to have somebody hold him under till he
drowned. “And second, Penny, Jesus, it took us a whole
weekend to put up that ward.”
He did a quick check: Penny was right, the defensive
spells around the apartment were gone, so gone that they
hadn’t even alerted him when they were going. Quentin
couldn’t quite believe it. Penny must have taken down their
ward from the outside, on the fly, from a standing start, in no
more time than it took him to ride up ten floors in an
elevator. Quentin kept his face blank—he didn’t want to
give Penny the satisfaction of seeing how impressed he
was.
“What about the key?”
Penny dug it out of his jacket pocket and tossed it to
Quentin.
“Took it off your doorman.” He shrugged. “Kind of thing
you learn on the street.”
Quentin was going to say something about how the
“street” in question was probably not a street at all but a
way or a lane located in some gated community, and
anyway it wasn’t that hard to steal a key from a sleeping
doorman when you were rocking Cholmondeley’s Stealth,
but it just seemed so unimportant, and the words were just
too heavy to get out of his mouth, like they were stone
blocks in his stomach that he would have had to physically
cough up and regurgitate. Fuck Penny, he was wasting
time. He had to talk to Alice.
But by then people had heard Penny’s voice. Richard
came shambling in from the kitchen where he’d been
cleaning up, already awake and irri tatingly showered and
coiffed and groomed and pressed. Soon Janet came out of
Eliot’s room, regally swathed in a comforter as if nothing
whatsoever unusual had happened the night before. She
squeaked when she saw Penny and disappeared into a
bathroom.Quentin realized he would have to get dressed and deal
with this. Daylight was here, and with it had come the world
of appearances and lies and acting like everything was
fine. They were all going to make scrambled eggs and talk
about how hungover they were and drink mimosas and
Bloody Marys with extra Tabasco and black pepper and act
like nothing was wrong, as if Quentin hadn’t just broken
Alice’s heart for no better reason than that he was drunk
and felt like it. And as unbelievable, as unthinkable as it
seemed, they were going to listen to what Penny had to
say.
He was a year behind Quentin and Alice, but by the end of
his Fourth Year Penny had decided—he explained, once
his audience was assembled and dressed and arranged
around him in the living room with drinks and plates,
standing or lying full length on couches or sitting cross-
legged on the floor as their physical and emotional
conditions permitted—that Brakebills had taught him
everything it was going to teach him, so he dropped out
and moved to a small town in Maine, a few miles north of
Bar Harbor. The town was called Oslo, a seedy little resort
village with a population that shrank by 80 percent in the off-
season.
Penny chose Oslo—not even New Oslo, just Oslo, as if
they thought they came up with it first—for its total lack of
anything that might distract him. He arrived in mid-
September and had no trouble renting a small farmhouse
on the outskirts of town on a one-lane rural route. His land-
lord was a retired schoolteacher who handed him the keys
and then fled to his winter home in South Carolina. Penny’s
nearest neighbors on either side were a congregationless
one-shack Pentecostal church and an out-of-session
summer camp for disturbed children. It was perfect. He had
found his Walden.He had everything he needed: silence; solitude; a U-haul
trailer packed with an enviable library of magical codices,
monographs, chapbooks, reference books, and
broadsheets. He had a sturdy desk, a well-lit room, and a
window with an unscenic view of an unmown backyard that
offered no particular temptation to gaze out at it. He had a
manageable, intriguingly dangerous research project that
showed every sign of maturing into a genuinely interesting
line of inquiry. He was in heaven.
But one afternoon a few weeks after he arrived, as he sat
at his desk, his watery blue eyes trailing over words of
consummate power written centuries ago with a pen made
out of a hippogriff feather, Penny found his mind wandering.
His large, usually lineless brow crinkled. Something was
sapping his powers of concentration. Was he under attack,
maybe by a rival researcher? Who would dare! He rubbed
his eyes and shook his head and focused harder. But his
attention continued to drift.
It turned out that Penny had discovered in himself a
weakness, a flaw he never would have suspected himself of
in a thousand years, an age to which, with a few careful
modifications that he would look into when he had the time,
he had every intention of living. The flaw was this: he was
lonely.
The idea was outrageous. It was humiliating. He, Penny,
was a stone-cold loner, a desperado. He was the Han Solo
of Oslo. He knew and loved this about himself. He had
spent four interminable years at Brakebills surrounded by
idiots—except for Melanie, as he privately referred to
Professor Van der Weghe—and now he was finally free of
their incessant bullshit.
But now Penny found himself doing things for no reason.
Unproductive things. He stood on a concrete dam near his
farmhouse and threw down rocks to break up the thin crust
of ice that formed on the outflow pond. He walked the mile
and a half to the center of town and played video games in
the windowless video arcade back behind the pharmacy,stuffing his mouth with stale gumballs from the gumball
machine, alongside the no-hope, dead-eyed teenagers
who hung out there and did the exact same thing. He made
awkward, inexperienced eyes at the underage clerk at the
Book Bin, which actually sold mostly stationery and
greeting cards, not books. He confided his troubles to the
miserable pod of four buffalo who lived on the buffalo farm
out on the Bar Harbor road. He thought about climbing over
the fence and petting one of their huge, wedge-shaped
heads, but he didn’t quite have the nerve. They were big
buffalo, and you never knew what they were thinking.
That was September. By October he had bought an
herb-green Subaru Impreza and was making regular trips
to a dance club in Bangor, swigging from a fifth of vodka on
the passenger seat (since the club was all ages and didn’t
serve alcohol) as he drove the forty-five minutes through
trackless pine forests. Progress on his research project
had dwindled to almost nothing, a couple of hours a day of
listless leafing through old notes punctuated by generous
breaks for online porn. It was humiliating.
The dance club in Bangor was open only on Friday and
Saturday nights, and all he did there was shoot pool in a
half-lit lounge area off the main dance floor with other
creepy male loners like himself. But it was in that half-lit
lounge on one of those Saturday nights that he spotted, to
his secret consternation and even more secret relief and
gratitude, a familiar face. It was a hard face to like, the face
of an emaciated corpse that hadn’t been particularly
attractive even in life, with a horrible pencil mustache on its
upper lip. It belonged to the itinerant salesman Lovelady.
Lovelady was in the dance club in Bangor for
approximately the same reason that Penny was there: he
had run as far away as he could from the world of Brakebills
and magic and then gotten lonely. Over a pitcher of Coors
Light and a few games of pool, all of which Lovelady won
handily—you don’t spend a lifetime trafficking in fake
magical items without picking up a few real skills—theyLovelady depended heavily for his livelihood on luck and
the gullibility of strangers. He spent most of his time trolling
the world’s junk shops and estate sales the way longline
fishermen troll the ocean. He accosted the emotionally
vulnerable widows of recently deceased magicians and
loitered on the outskirts of the conversations of his wisers
and betters, keeping his eye out for anything that had value
or that might plausibly be made to appear to have value. He
had spent the past few months in northern England, in a
studio apartment over a garage in a dreary suburb of Hull,
trying his luck in antique stores and secondhand
bookshops. His days were spent on buses and, when he
was really down on his luck, on an ancient one-speed
bicycle he borrowed without permission from the garage,
which he wasn’t supposed to have access to.
At some point during his stay Lovelady began to receive
unwanted attention. Normally he was desperate for
anybody to pay attention to him, anybody at all, but this was
very different. Strangers on buses stared fixedly at him for
no reason. Pay phones rang when he walked by them.
When he counted his change, he found only coins from the
year he was born. When he watched TV, all he saw was an
image of his own face, with a mysterious empty city in the
background. Lovelady was neither learned nor particularly
intelligent, but he survived on his instincts, and all his
instincts told him that something was gravely amiss.
Alone in his apartment, sitting on his pea-soup-colored
foam couch, Lovelady took stock. His best guess was this:
he had inadvertently acquired an object of genuine power,
and something out there coveted it. He was being hunted.
That same night he pulled up stakes. He abandoned his
security deposit, donned a rattling array of charms and
fetishes, took a bus to London and the Chunnel train to
Paris, and from there crossed the Atlantic to throw himself
on the already overtaxed mercy of Brakebills. He spent an
exhausting afternoon combing the woods north of New York
for the school’s familiar, comforting compound.As the sun set through the trees, and the early winter chill
gnawed at the tips of his ears, the horrifying truth sank in.
He was in the right place, but Brakebills would no longer
appear to him. Something, either him or his wares, was
objectionable to the school’s defensive spells. Whatever he
was carrying had rendered him untouchable.
That was when he cut and ran to Maine. It was ironic: for
once in his life Lovelady had lucked into something
genuinely powerful, a big score. But it was too much luck all
at once. He was out of his league. He could have dumped
his stock, all of it, right there in the middle of the frozen
woods, but after a lifetime of greedy scrimping he didn’t
quite have the gumption. It would have broken his
avaricious heart. Instead he rented a Kozy Kabin in the
woods at the off-season rate and conducted a thorough
inventory.
He recognized it right away, mixed in with a jumbled
consignment of grubby costume jewelry, in a plastic bag
tied with a twisty. He didn’t know what it was, but its power
was obvious even to his untrained eye.
He motioned Penny over to a corner, reached into the
pocket of his seedy overcoat, which he hadn’t taken off all
night, and laid the Baggie on a round particleboard bar
table. He grinned his livid, discolored grin at Penny. The
buttons were ordinary surplus vintage buttons: two holes,
four holes, fake leather, fake tortoiseshell, big angular
novelty knobs, and tiny bakelite pin-pricks. A few of them
were just leftover beads. Penny’s eye immediately went to
one of them, a flat, otherwise unremarkable pearlescent-
white overcoat button about an inch across. It was heavier
than it should have been. It practically vibrated with barely
contained magical force.
He knew what it was. He knew better than to touch it.
“A magic button?” Janet said. “How weird. What was it?”
Her hair was a disaster, but she was obscenely relaxed,
sipping coffee in an armchair, showing off her legs in ashort silk bathrobe. She obviously felt triumphant, relishing
her conquest, and by extension her victory over Alice.
Quentin hated her at that moment.
“You really don’t know?” Penny said.
Quentin thought he had a guess, but he wasn’t going to
say it out loud.
“What did you do?” he said instead.
“I made him come back with me to my house. That night.
He wasn’t safe where he was, and at least I had a basic
security setup. We called the woman who sold him the
consignment, but she insisted the buttons weren’t in her
records. The next day we went and got his stuff and drove
to Boston, and I gave him eighty thousand dollars for it. He
wouldn’t take cash, just gold and diamonds. I practically
cleaned out a Harry Winston, but it was worth it. Then I told
him to fuck off, and he did.”
“Eighty thousand dollars,” Eliot said, “wouldn’t clear out a
display case at a Zales, let alone a Harry Winston.”
Penny ignored him.
“That was two days ago. That button attracts attention. I
was staying at a hotel in Boston, but last night a fire two
floors above me killed a cleaning lady. I never went back to
my room. I took the Fung Wah bus from South Station. I had
to walk here from Chinatown; whenever I got in a cab the
engine would die.
“But what matters is that it’s real, and it’s ours.”
“Ours? Who are ‘we’?” Richard asked.
“You,” Quentin said coldly, “are a fucking nutjob.”
“Quentin gets it,” Penny said. “Anybody else?”
“Q, what is he talking about?”
A silent spear of pure, glittering ice entered Quentin’s
heart. He hadn’t heard Alice come in. She stood at theedge of the circle, her hair unwashed and adrift, like a
sleepy child who wakes in the middle of the night and
appears like an uncertain spirit at the edge of a grown-up
party.
“He doesn’t know what he’s talking about,” Quentin
muttered. He couldn’t look at her. He was drowning in
remorse. It almost made him angry at her, how much it hurt
to look at her.
“Do you want to explain it or should I?” Penny said.
“You do it. I’m not going to be able to say it without
laughing my head off.”
“Well, somebody say something, or I’m going back to
bed,” Eliot said.
“Ladies and gentlemen,” Penny said, gravely and
grandly, “we are all going to Fillory.”
At the end of The Wandering Dune —Penny began; it was
a lecture he had obviously rehearsed—Helen and Jane
Chatwin receive a gift from High-bound, the captain of the
rabbit-crewed clipper ship that the girls encounter in the
desert. The gift is a little brass-bound oak chest containing
five magical buttons, all different shapes and colors, one for
each of the Chatwins, each with the power to take the
wearer from Earth to Fillory and back again at will.
Everybody in the room had read the Fillory books, in
Quentin’s case multiple times, but Penny rehearsed the
rules anyway. The buttons don’t take you directly there: first
they move you to a kind of in-between nether-world, an
interdimensional layover, and from there you can make the
leap to Fillory.
No one knows where this transitional world is. It may be
an alternate plane of existence, or a place between planes,
interleaved between them like a flower pressed betweenpages, or a master plane that contains all planes—the
spine that gathers the pages and binds them together. To
the naked eye it looks like a deserted city, an endless
series of empty stone squares, but it serves as a kind of
multidimensional switchboard. In the center of each square
is a fountain. Step into one of them, the story goes, and
you’ll be transported to another universe. There are
hundreds of different squares, possibly an infinite number,
and a corresponding number of alternate universes. The
bunnies call this place the Neitherlands—because it’s
neither here nor there—or sometimes just the City.
But the most important point, Penny said, is that at the
end of The Wandering Dune Helen hid all the buttons
somewhere in her aunt’s house in Cornwall. She felt they
were too mechanical, they made the journey too easy. Their
power was wrong. You shouldn’t be able to just go to Fillory
whenever you wanted, like catching a bus, she argued. A
trip to Fillory had to be earned, that had always been the
way. It was a reward for the worthy, bestowed by the ram-
gods Ember and Umber. The buttons were a perversion of
this divine grace, a usurping of it. They broke the rules.
Ember and Umber couldn’t control them. Fillory was
fundamentally a religious fantasy, but the buttons weren’t
religious at all, they were magical—they were just tools,
with no values attached. You could use them for anything
you wanted, good or evil. They were so magical they were
practically technological.
So she hid them. Jane was inconsolable, understandably
enough, and tore up half the property looking for them, but
according to The Wandering Dune she never found them,
and Plover never wrote any more books.
The Wandering Dune ends in the summer of 1917, or
possibly 1918; because of the lack of real-world detail it’s
impossible to date it precisely. After that the whereabouts
of the buttons is unknown. But try a thought experiment,
Penny suggested: How long could a box of buttons hidden
by a twelve-year-old girl plausibly have stayed hidden? Tenyears? Fifty? Nothing stays hidden forever. Wasn’t it
possible—even inevitable—that in the decades that
followed a maid or a real estate agent or another little girl
would have found them again? And that from there they
would have made their way onto the magical gray market?
“I always thought they were supposed to be lapel
buttons,” Richard said. “Like a pin. Like ‘I Like Ike.’ ”
“Um, okay, so let’s back up for a second?” Quentin said
cheerily. He was in the perfect mood for somebody,
anybody besides himself, to make an ass of himself, and if
that person could be Penny, and if Quentin could help him
do it, then ever so much the better. “The Fillory books are
fiction? Nothing you’re talking about actually happened?”
“Yes and no,” Penny said, surprisingly reasonably. “I’ll
allow that much of Plover’s narrative might be fictional. Or
fictionalized. But I’ve come to believe that the basic
mechanics of interdimensional travel that Plover describes
are quite real.”
“Really.” Quentin knew Penny well enough to know that he
never bluffed, but he kept going anyway out of
pigheadedness, urged on by his own inner vileness. “And
what makes you think that?”
Penny regarded him with benevolent pity as he prepared
the hammer blow.
“Well, I can certainly tell you that the Neitherlands are very
real. I’ve spent most of the past three years there.”
No one had an answer to this. The room was silent. Quentin
finally dared to glance over at Alice, but her face was a
mask. It would almost have been better if she looked angry.
“I don’t know if you know this,” Penny said, “in fact I’m
pretty sure you don’t, but I did most of my work at Brakebills
on travel between alternate worlds. Or between planes, as
we called them. Melanie and I.“As far as we could determine it was an entirely new
Discipline. Not that I was the first person ever to study the
subject, but I was the first to have a special aptitude for it.
My talents were so unusual that Melanie—Professor Van
der Weghe—decided to pull me out of regular classes and
give me my own course of study.
“The spellcraft was extremely involved, and I had to
improvise a lot of it. I can tell you, a lot of what’s in the
canon on this stuff is way off base. Way off base. They’re
not seeing the whole picture, and the part of it they are
seeing is by far the least important part. You’d think your
friend Bigby would have some grasp of this stuff, but he has
no idea. I was surprised, I really was. But there were still
some issues I couldn’t resolve.”
“Such as,” Eliot said.
“Well, so far I’ve only been able to travel alone. I can
transport my body and clothes and some small supplies,
but nothing else and nobody else. Second, I can cross to
the Neitherlands, but that’s it. I’m stuck there. The wider
multiverse is closed to me.”
“You mean—?” said Janet. “Wait, so you’ve been to this
amazing magical Interville but that’s it?” She actually looked
underwhelmed. “I thought you were coming in here this
badass multidimensional desperado and all.”
“No.” Penny could be defensive when he felt like he was
under attack, but he was so autistically focused right now
that even direct mockery bounced right off him. “My
explorations have been limited to the City. It’s quite a rich
environment in itself, an amazingly complex artifact, to a
magically trained eye. There’s so little information in the
books— The Wandering Dune is told through the eyes of a
child, and it’s not clear to me that either Plover or the
Chatwins had any particular command of the techniques
they describe. I thought at first that the entire place was a
kludge, a virtual environment that functioned as a kind of
three-dimensional interface hacked onto a masterinterdimensional switchboard. Not that it’s much of an
interface. A maze of identical unlabeled squares? How
much help is that? But it was all I could think of.
“The thing is, the more I study it, the more I think it’s
exactly the opposite—that our world has much less
substance than the City, and what we experience as reality
is really just a footnote to what goes on there. An
epiphenomenon.
“But now that we have the button”—he patted his jeans
pocket—“we’ll learn so much more. We’ll go so much
further.”
“Have you tried it?” Richard asked.
Penny hesitated. For somebody who so obviously
wanted to be hardcore, he was painfully transparent.
“Of course he hasn’t,” Quentin said, smelling blood. “He’s
scared shit-less. He has no idea what that thing is, only that
it’s dangerous as hell, and he wants one of us to be a
guinea pig.”
“That’s absolutely not true!” Penny said. His ears were
getting red. “An artifact on this level is best faced in the
company of allies and observers! With the proper controls
and safeguards! No reasonable magician—”
“Look. Penny.” Now Quentin could play the reasonable
one, and he did it with maximum nastiness. “Slow down.
You’ve gotten so far ahead of yourself, you can’t even see
how you got there. You’ve seen an old city, and a bunch of
pools and fountains, and you’ve got a button with some
heavy-duty enchantments on it, and you’re looking for some
framework to fit them all together, and you’ve latched on to
this Fillory thing. But you’re grasping at straws. It’s crazy.
You’re cramming a few chance data points into a story that
has nothing to do with reality. You need to take a giant step
back. Take a deep breath. You’re way off the reservation.”
Nobody spoke. The skepticism in the room was
palpable. Quentin was winning, and he knew it. Pennylooked around at his audience beseechingly, unable to
believe that he was losing them.
Alice stepped forward into the empty circle around
Penny.
“Quentin,” she said, “you have always been the most
unbelievable pussy.”
Her voice broke only a little as she said it. She grabbed
Quentin’s wrist with one hand and shoved the other one into
the left-hand pocket of Penny’s baggy black jeans. She
fumbled for an instant.
Then they vanished together.THE NEITHERLANDS
Quentin was swimming. Or he could have been swimming,
but in fact he was just floating. It was dark, and his body
was weightless, suspended in chilly water. His testicles
shrank in on themselves away from the cold. Wavering,
heatless sunbeams lanced down through the darkness.
After the first shock the coolness of the water, combined
with the weightlessness, felt indescribably good to his
dried-out, feverish, unshow ered, hungover body. He could
have thrashed and panicked, but instead he just let himself
hang there, arms out in a dead man’s float. Whatever was
coming next would come. He opened his eyes, and the
water bathed them in moist healing chill. He closed them
again. There was nothing to see.
It was a glorious relief. The numbness of it was just
magnificent. At the moment when it had been at its most
intolerably painful, the world, normally so unreliable and
insensitive in these matters, had done him the favor of
vanishing completely.
Granted, he would need air at some point. He would look
into that in due course. As bad as things were, drowning
would still be a hasty course of action. For now all he
wanted was to stay here forever, hanging neutrally buoyant
in the amniotic void, neither in the world nor out of it, neither
dead nor alive.
But an iron manacle was clamped around his wrist. It was
Alice’s hand, and it was pulling him upward ruthlessly. She
wouldn’t let him be. Reluctantly, he joined her in kicking
toward the surface. Their heads broke water at the same
moment.
They were in the center of a still, hushed, empty city
square, treading water in the round pool of a fountain. It was
absolutely silent: no wind, no birds, no insects. Broad
paving stones stretched away in all directions, clean andbare as if they’d just been swept. On all four sides of the
square stood a row of stone buildings. They gave off an
impression of indescribable age—they weren’t decrepit,
but they’d been lived in. They looked vaguely Italianate; they
could have been in Rome, or Venice. But they weren’t.
The sky was low and overcast, and a light rain was
falling, almost mist. The droplets dimpled the still surface of
the water, which made its way into the pool from the
overflowing bowl of a giant bronze lotus flower. The square
had the air of a place that had been hastily abandoned, five
minutes ago or five centuries, it was impossible to tell.
Quentin treaded water for a minute, then took one long
breaststroke over to the stone lip. The pool was only about
fifteen feet across, and the rim was scarred and pocked:
old limestone. Bracing himself with both hands, he heaved
himself up and and flopped out of the water onto dry land.
“Jesus,” he whispered, panting. “Fucking Penny. It is
real.”
It wasn’t just because he hated Penny. He really hadn’t
thought it was true. But now here they were in the City. This
was it, the actual Neitherlands, or something that looked
uncannily like them. It was unbelievable. The most naïve,
most blissfully happy-sappy dream of his childhood was
true. God, he’d been so wrong about everything.
He took a deep breath, then another. It was like white
light flooding through him. He didn’t know he could be this
happy. Everything that was weighing him down—Janet,
Alice, Penny, everything—was suddenly insubstantial by
comparison. If the City was real, then Fillory could be real,
too. Last night had been a disaster, an apocalypse, but this
was so much more important. It was almost funny now.
There was so much joy ahead of them.
He turned to Alice. “This is exactly —”
Her fist caught him smack in his left eye. She hit like a
girl, without any weight behind it, but he hadn’t seen itcoming to roll with it. The left half of the world flashed white.
He bent over, half blind, the heel of his hand over his eye.
She kicked him in the shins, one and then the other, with
dismaying accuracy.
“Asshole! You ass hole!”
Alice’s face was pale. Her teeth were chattering.
“You bastard. You fucking coward.”
“Alice,” he managed. “Alice, I’m sorry. But listen . . . look
—” He tried to point at the world around them while also
verifying that his cornea was still intact.
“Don’t you fucking speak to me!” She slapped wildly at
his head and shoulders with both hands so that he ducked
and put up his arms. “Don’t you even dare talk to me, you
whore! You fucking whore!”
He staggered a few steps away across the stone, trying
to escape, his sopping wet clothes flapping, but she
followed him like a swarm of bees. Their voices sounded
small and empty in the echoless square.
“Alice! Alice!” His orbital ridge was a ring of fire. “Forget
about all that for a second! Just for a second!” She’d still
been holding the button in her fist when she clocked him. It
must be a lot heavier than it looked. “You don’t understand.
It was just . . . everything—” There was a right way to say
this. “I got confused. Life just seemed so empty—I mean
out there—it’s like what you said, we have to live while we
can. Or that’s what I thought. But it got out of control. It just
got out of control.” Why was he talking in clichés? Get to the
point. He definitely had one. “We were all just so drunk—”
“Really. Too drunk to fuck?” She had him there. “I could
kill you. Do you understand that?” Her face was terrible.
There were two white-hot points on her flushed cheeks. “I
could burn you to nothing right where you stand. I’m
stronger than you. Nothing you could do would stop me.”
“Listen, Alice.” He had to stop her from talking. “I knowit’s bad. It’s very, very bad. And I’m so sorry. You’ll never
know how sorry. You have to believe me. But it’s so
important that you understand!”
“What are you, a child? You got confused? Why didn’t
you just end it, Quentin? You obviously lost interest a long
time ago. You really are a child, aren’t you? You’re
obviously not enough of a man to have a real relationship.
You’re not even enough of a man to end a real relationship.
Do I have to do absolutely everything for you?
“Or you know what it is? You hate yourself so much, you’ll
hurt anybody who loves you. That’s it, isn’t it? Just to get
even with them for loving you. I never saw that before now.”
She stopped at this, shaking her head, lost in a dream of
disbelief. Her own words had brought her up short. In the
silence the fact that he had cheated on her, and with Janet
of all people, hit her all over again, as fully as it had the first
time, two hours ago. Quentin could see it: it was like she’d
been shot in the stomach.
She held up her hand, palm out, like she was shielding
her eyes from his monstrous face. A lock of wet hair was
plastered to her cheek. She was gasping for breath. Her
lips had gone pale. But they kept moving.
“Was it worth it?” she said. “You always wanted her, you
think I didn’t see that? You think I’m stupid? Answer me: Do
you think I’m stupid? Just tell me! I really want to know if you
think I’m stupid!”
She ran at him and slapped his face. He took the full
force of the blow.
“No, I don’t think you’re stupid, Alice.” Quentin felt like a
boxer who was knocked out standing, out on his feet,
crosses for eyes, just wishing to God that he could fall
down. She was right, a thousand times right, but if he could
just make her see what he saw—if she could only put things
in proper perspective. Fucking women. She was walking
away now, toward one of the alleys that led to anothersquare, leaving a trail of damp squashing foot prints behind
her. “But will you please look around you?” He was
begging, trailing after her, his voice ragged with exhaustion.
“Will you please acknowledge for a second that something
more important than who stuck what body part where is
going on around you?”
She wasn’t listening, or maybe she was just determined
to say what she was going to say.
“You know,” she said, almost conversationally, crossing
into the next square, “I bet you actually thought fucking her
was going to make you happy. You just go from one thing to
the next, don’t you, and you think it’s going to make you
happy. Brakebills didn’t. I didn’t. Did you really think Janet
would? It’s just another fantasy, Quentin.”
She stopped and hugged her arms over her midsection,
like the pain was a gastric ulcer, and sobbed bitterly. Her
wet clothes clung to her; a little pool was forming around
her. He wanted to comfort her, but he didn’t dare touch her.
The stillness of the square was almost tangible around
them. The Fillory books had described them as all exactly
identical, but he could see they weren’t, far from it. They
shared the same crypto-Italian style, but this one had a
colonnade on one side, and the fountain in the center was
rectangular, not round like the one they’d come in through.
At one end a white marble face vomited water into it.
Footsteps on stone. Quentin thought he would have
welcomed any interruption, anything, especially if it was
carnivorous and would eat him alive.
“Kind of a reunion, isn’t it?”
Penny came stepping briskly across the flagstones
toward them. The gray facade of a stone piazza loomed
above them, with heraldic inlays: an anchor and three
flames. Penny looked as happy and relaxed as Quentin had
ever seen him. He was in his element and glowing with
pride. His clothes were dry.“Sorry. I’ve spent so much time here, but I’ve never had
anybody to show it to. You wouldn’t think that would matter,
but it does. When I first came through there was a corpse
lying right there on the ground. Right over there.”
He pointed like a campus tour guide.
“Human, or close to it, anyway. Maybe Maori, he had a
tattoo on his face. He could only have been dead a few
days. He must have gotten trapped here—came in, but the
pools wouldn’t let him out somehow. I think he died of
starvation. The next time I came the body was gone.”
Penny studied their two faces and took in the situation for
the first time: Alice’s tears, Quentin’s rapidly darkening
black eye, their toxic body language.
“Oh.” His face softened slightly. He made a gesture, and
suddenly their clothes were warm and dry and pressed, too.
“Look, you have to forget about all that stuff here. This place
can be dangerous if you’re not paying attention. I’ll give you
an example: Which way would you go to get back to our
home square?”
Alice and Quentin looked around obediently, Penny’s
reluctant students. In their running fight they had cut an
angle through the second square into a third. Or a fourth?
Their footprints had already faded. There was an alley on
each side of the square, and through each alley you could
catch a glimpse of other irregular alleys and fountains and
squares, more and more, diminishing to infinity. It was like
a trick with mirrors. The sun was hidden, if there even was a
sun. Penny was right: they had no idea which one led back
to Earth, or even which general direction they’d come from.
“Don’t worry, I marked it. You only came about a quarter
mile. One up and one over.” Penny pointed in exactly the
opposite direction Quentin would have guessed. “In the
book they just wander at random, and it always comes out
all right, but we have to be more careful. I use orange spray
paint to mark a path. I have to do it fresh every time I come
here. The paint disappears.”Penny headed back in the direction he’d pointed.
Tentatively, without looking at each other, Quentin and Alice
fell in behind him. Their clothes were getting damp all over
again from the rain.
“I have strict operating procedures when I’m here. There
are no directions, so I’ve had to invent new ones. I named
them after the buildings in the Earth square, one for each
side: palace, villa, tower, church. Can’t be a real church, but
that’s what it looks like. This is churchward, the way we’re
going now.”
They were back at the fountain, which Penny had circled
with big sloppy X ’s of fluorescent orange paint. A little way
off there was a crude shelter, a tarp with a cot and a table
underneath. Quentin wondered how he’d missed it before.
“I set up a base camp here for a while, with food and
water and books.” He was so excited, like a rich, unpopular
kid the first time he brings home friends to see his fancy
toys. He didn’t even notice that Quentin and Alice weren’t
saying anything. “I always thought it would be Melanie who
came here the first time, but she could never quite work the
spells. I tried to teach her, but she’s not quite strong
enough. Almost, though. In a way I’m happy it’s you guys.
You know you were the only friends I ever had at
Brakebills?”
Penny shook his head as if there was something
amazing about the fact that more people didn’t like him.
Only twelve hours ago, Quentin thought, he and Alice would
have barely been able to keep from cracking up with
conspiratorial laughter at the suggestion that they had ever
been friends with Penny.
“Oh, I almost forgot: no light spells here. They go crazy.
When I first came here, I tried to do a basic illumination. I
couldn’t see for two hours afterward. It’s like the air here is
hyperoxygenated, only with magic. One spark and
everything goes up.”
There were two stone steps leading up to the fountain.Quentin sat down on the top one and leaned his back
against the rim. The water looked unnaturally black, like ink.
There was no point in fighting anymore. He would just sit
here and listen to Penny talk.
“You wouldn’t believe how far I’ve walked in this place.
Hundreds of miles! Way farther than the Chatwins ever
went. Once I saw a fountain that had overflowed like a
plugged-up toilet and flooded its square a foot deep, and
half the squares around it. Twice I’ve seen ones that were
capped. Sealed over with a bronze cover like a well, like
they were keeping people out. Or in. Once I found
fragments of white marble on the pavement. I think it was a
broken sculpture. I tried to piece it back together, to see
what it was a statue of, but I never could.
“You can’t get into the buildings. I’ve tried every way you
can think of. Lock picks. Sledgehammers. Once I brought
an acetylene cutting torch. And the windows are too dark to
see in, but once I brought a flashlight—you know, one of
those high-intensity rescue flashlights, that the Coast Guard
uses? When I turned it all the way up I could see inside, just
a little bit.
“I’ll tell you something: they’re full of books. Whatever they
look like on the outside, on the inside every one of these
buildings is really a library.”
Quentin had no idea how long they’d been there, but it was
a while. Hours maybe. They’d walked through square after
square, like lost tourists, the three of them. Everything they
saw shared a common style, and the same weathered,
ancient look, but nothing ever quite repeated. Quentin and
Alice couldn’t look at each other, but they couldn’t resist the
seductions of this grand, melancholy place either. At least
the rain had let up.
They passed through a tiny square, a quarter the size of
the others and paved in cobblestones, where if they stoodin the center it seemed like they could hear the ocean, the
breaking and withdrawing of waves. In another square
Penny pointed out a window with ghostly scorch marks
above it, as if it had been the scene of a fire. Quentin
wondered who had built this place, and where they’d gone.
What had happened here?
Penny described in great technical detail his elaborate
but ultimately unsuccessful campaign to rappel up the side
of one of the buildings to get a view above the rooftops.
The one time he’d managed to secure a line, on a piece of
decorative masonry, he’d been overcome by dizziness
halfway up, and when he recovered he found himself turned
around, rappeling down the same wall he’d been trying to
ascend.
At different times all three of them saw, in the farthest
possible distance, a verdant square that seemed to contain
a garden, with rows of what might have been lime trees in
it. But they could never reach it—as they approached it
always lost itself in the shifting perspectives of the
alleyways, which were slightly out of alignment with one
another.
“We should get back,” Alice said finally. Her voice
sounded dead. It was the first time she’d spoken since she
screamed at him.
“Why?” Penny asked. He was having the time of his life.
He must have been terribly lonely here, Quentin thought. “It
doesn’t matter how much time we spend here, you know.
No time passes on Earth. To the others it’ll be like we
popped out and popped right back, just like that, bing-
bang. They won’t even have time to be surprised. I spent a
whole semester here once and nobody noticed.”
“I’m sure we wouldn’t have noticed anyway,” Quentin
said, because he knew Penny would ignore him.
“I’m actually probably a year or so older than you guys,
subjectively, because of all the time I spent here. I should
have kept closer track.”“Penny, what are we doing here?”
Penny looked puzzled.
“Isn’t it obvious? Quentin, we’re going to Fillory. We have
to. This is going to change everything.”
“Okay. Okay.” Something nagged at him about this, and
he was going to put it into words. He had to force his weary
brain to grind out thoughts. “Penny, we have to slow down.
Look at the big picture. The Chatwins got to go to Fillory
because they were chosen. By Ember and Umber, the
magic sheep. Rams. They were there to do good, to fight
the Watcherwoman, or whatever.”
Alice was nodding.
“They only got to go when something was going on,” she
said. “The Watcherwoman, or the wandering dune, or that
ticking watch thing in The Flying Forest . Or to find Martin.
That was what Helen Chatwin was saying. We can’t just go
barging in without an invitation. That’s why she hid the
buttons in the first place—they were a mistake. Fillory
wasn’t like the real world, it was a perfect universe where
everything was organized for good. Ember and Umber are
supposed to control the borders.
“But with the buttons anybody could get in. Random
people who weren’t part of the story. Bad people. The
buttons weren’t part of the logic of Fillory. They were a hole
in the border, a loophole.”
The mere fact that Alice knew her Fillory lore cold, no
hesitation, added another high-powered exponent to
Quentin’s guilty, bankrupt longing for her. How could he
have gotten so confused that he thought he wanted Janet
instead of her?
Penny was nodding and rocking his whole body forward
and backward semi-autistically.
“But you’re forgetting something, Alice. We’re not bad
people.” The zeal light came on behind Penny’s eyes.“We’re the good guys. Has it occurred to you that maybe
that’s why we found the button in the first place? Maybe this
is it, we’re getting the call. Maybe Fillory needs us.”
He waited expectantly for a reaction.
“It’s thin, Penny,” Quentin said finally, weakly. “This is all
really thin.”
“So what?” Penny stood up. “ So. What. So what if Fillory
doesn’t work out? Which it will? So we end up somewhere
else. It’s another world, Quentin. It’s a million other worlds.
The Neitherlands are the place where all worlds meet! Who
knows what other imaginary universes might turn out to be
real? All of human literature could just be a user’s guide to
the multiverse! Once I marked off a hundred squares
straight in one direction and never saw the edge of this
place. We could explore for the rest of our lives and never
begin to map it all. This is it, Quentin! It’s the new frontier,
the challenge of our generation and the next fifty
generations after that!
“It all starts here, Quentin. With us. You just have to want
it.
“What do you say?”
He actually stuck out his hand, as if he expected Quentin
and Alice to put theirs on top of his, and they would all do a
football cheer. Go team! Quentin was sorely tempted to
leave him hanging, but finally he let Penny give him a limp
low-five. His eye still throbbed.
“We should get back,” Alice said again. She looked
exhausted. She couldn’t have slept much last night.
Alice produced the oddly weighty pearl button from her
pocket. It looked ridiculous—it had sounded reasonable
enough in the books, but that was the books, and the
Chatwins had used the buttons only the one time. In real life
it was like they were playing some children’s game. It was a
little kid’s idea of a magical object. Though what did you
expect from a bunch of talking bunnies?Back in their home square they lined up on the edge of
the fountain, holding hands, balancing precariously on the
rim. The prospect of getting wet again was unspeakably
depressing. In a corner of the square Quentin saw that a
sapling had broken its way up through one of the paving
stones from below. It was gnarled and bent, twisted almost
into the shape of a helix, but it was alive. It made him
wonder what had been paved over to build the City, and
what would be there if it should ever fall. Had there been
woods here? Would there be again? This too shall pass.
Alice stood on Penny’s other side so she wouldn’t have
to touch Quen tin. They stepped off the edge together, right
foot first, in sync.
The crossing was different this time. They fell down
through the water like it was air, then through darkness,
then it was like they were falling out of the sky, down toward
Manhattan on a gray Friday morning in winter—brown
parks, gray buildings, yellow taxis waiting on stripy white
cross-walks, black rivers studded with tugboats and barges
—down through the gray roof and into the living room where
Janet and Eliot and Richard were still caught in mid-double
take, as if Alice had just now grabbed the button in Penny’s
pocket, as if the past three hours hadn’t even happened.
“Alice!” Janet said gleefully. “Get your hand out of
Penny’s pants!”UPSTATE
Of course after that everybody had to go. They barely even
said anything about Quentin’s swollen eye. (“The natives
were restless,” he ad-libbed dryly.) Moments after he and
Alice returned Josh came in—he’d spent the night with
Anaïs after all—and they had to tell him the whole story all
over again. Then they went through in threes. Josh went
through with Penny and Richard. Penny took Janet and
Eliot through. Josh called Anaïs and made her come over,
and she went through with him and Penny.
Of them all only Janet had a bad reaction. The moment
they surfaced, apparently, she heaved and threw up her
breakfast right into the cold, clear magical water. Then she
panicked. Eliot came back with a dead-on impression of
the frantic way she’d clutched Penny’s arm and said:
“Button! Button now!”
Quentin was unmoved by her discomfort. She was a
vampire, he thought. She preyed on other people’s healthy
love and made it sick and crippled.
The mood in the room was serious and sober.
Everybody gave each other long, searching looks heavy
with significance. Nobody could seem to put into words
how important it was, but they all agreed that this was a
major thing. Major. And it had to be their thing, for now at
least, they had to contain it. Nobody else could know. At
Penny’s insistence they sat down in a big circle on the rug
in the living room and rewove the wards on the apartment,
right then and there, working together. Richard’s taste for
authority, which so often made his presence all but
unendurable, turned out to come in handy now. He directed
the group casting in an efficient, businesslike fashion, like a
seasoned conductor leading a chamber orchestra through
a difficult passage of Bartók.
It took twenty minutes to finish the spell, and then tenmore to add some fancy extra defensive and concealment
layers—prudent, given the level of interest the button was
evidently attracting in the at-large magical ecosystem.
When they were done, when everything was checked out
and double-checked, a hush settled over the room. They all
sat still and just let the magnitude of what was happening
here marinate in their minds. Josh rose quietly and went to
the kitchen to make sandwiches for lunch. Eliot threw open
a window and lit a cigarette. Janet regarded Quentin with
cool amusement.
Quentin lay back on the rug and stared up at the ceiling.
He needed sleep, but this was no time for sleep. Wild
emotions competed for possession of his brain, like rival
armies taking and retaking the same hill: excitement,
remorse, anticipation, foreboding, grief, anger. He tried to
focus on Fillory, to make the good feeling come back. This
would change everything. Yes, his universe had just
expanded times a million, but Fillory was the key to it all.
That creeping, infectious sense of futility that had been
incubating in his brain even since before graduation had
met its magic bullet. Alice didn’t see it yet, but she would.
This was what they’d been waiting for. This is what her
parents had never found. A bleary grin kept smearing itself
across his face, and the years fell away from him like layers
of dead skin. They weren’t wasted years exactly, he could
never say that, but they were years in which, in spite of all
his amazing gifts, he’d been conscious of somehow not
quite getting the gift he wanted. Enough to get by on,
maybe. Sure. But this, this was everything. Now the present
had a purpose, and the future had a purpose, and even the
past, their whole lives, retroac tively, had meaning. Now
they knew what it was for.
If only it hadn’t happened now. If Penny could just have
shown up a day earlier. Fucking Penny. Everything had
been completely ruined and then completely redeemed in
such rapid succession that he couldn’t tell which state
ultimately applied. But if you looked at it a certain way, what
happened between him and Janet wasn’t about him andJanet at all, or even him and Alice. It was a symptom of the
sick, empty world they were all in together. And now they
had the medicine. The sick world was about to be healed.
The others stayed sitting on the floor, leaning back on
their elbows, lounging with their backs against the couch,
glancing at one another every once in a while and breaking
out in incredulous giggles. It was like they were stoned.
Quentin wondered if they were feeling what he was feeling.
This was what they’d been waiting for, too, without knowing
it, he thought. The thing that was going to save them from
the ennui and depression and meaningless busywork that
had been stalking them ever since graduation, with its
stale, alcoholic breath. It was finally here, and not a moment
too soon. They couldn’t go on like this, and now they
wouldn’t have to.
It was Eliot who finally took control of the situation. He
almost seemed like his old self again. Calendars were
cleared. Nobody had any serious obligations pending, not
compared to this, nothing that couldn’t be delayed or
sicked out of or blatantly welched on. He clapped his hands
and gave orders, and everybody seemed to enjoy being
serious and efficient for a change.
Nobody knew Anaïs especially well—not even Josh,
really—but she turned out to be a highly useful individual.
Her circle of acquaintance included somebody who knew
somebody who owned a place upstate, a comfortable old
farmhouse on a hundred acres, somewhere private enough
and defensible enough to use as a staging area for
whatever it was they were going to do next. And that first
somebody was also a magician senior enough to open a
portal to get them there. She would come by later that
afternoon, as soon as the Nets game was over.
They had to do it on the roof, because the very effective
and thorough triple-triple wards they’d just that morning set
up (and were now about to abandon) prevented any
magical transport directly in or out of the apartment. By five
thirty that afternoon they were looking out over the crowdedcocktail-tray skyline of lower Manhattan. No one else was
up there in winter. The roof was littered with windblown,
overturned plastic lawn furniture and char-encrusted
barbecue implements. A lonely wind chime burbled to itself
from the eaves of a utility shed.
They hugged themselves against the cold and scuffed
the gravel with their feet as they watched a hale, gray-
haired Belgian sorceress with nicotine-stained fingers and
a rather sinister wicker fetish on a string around her neck
pull open the portal. It was a five-sided portal, the bottom
edge running parallel to the ground, and its vertices shed
tiny sputtering actinic blue-white sparks—a purely cosmetic
touch, Quentin suspected, but they gave the scene an air
that was both melancholy and festive at the same time.
There was a sense of momentous occasion. They were
embarking on a grand adventure on the spur of the
moment. Isn’t that what it means to be alive, Goddamn it?
When the portal was finished and stable, the gray-haired
witch kissed Anaïs on both cheeks, said something in
French, and left hurriedly, but not before Janet made her
take a picture of all of them together with their trunks and
bundles and bags full of groceries piled up behind them,
using a disposable camera.
The group, all eight of them now, stepped through together
onto a vast, frost-burnt front lawn. The serious mood on the
roof was instantly broken as Janet and Anaïs and Josh
raced one another inside and squealed and bounced on
the sofas and ran around arguing over the bedrooms. Anaïs
had been mostly right about the house: it was certainly
large and comfortable, and at least a few bits of it were old.
Apparently it was once a generously proportioned Colonial
farmhouse, but somebody with progressive architectural
ideas had gotten hold of it and remixed its old timber and
fieldstone with glass and titanium and poured cement and
added flat-screen TVs and a high-end audio system and anAga range.
Alice went directly and silently up to the master bedroom,
which took up almost half the third floor, and closed the
door, glaring away any rival claimants with burning, red-
rimmed eyes. Suddenly exhausted after his mostly
sleepless night, followed by his magically extended day,
Quentin found a small guest bedroom at the back of the
house. Its hard, antiseptic twin bed felt like all he deserved.
It was dark when he woke up. The cool blue digits of the
clock radio said 10:27. In the darkness they could have
been phosphorescent squiggles on the side of a deep-sea
fish. He couldn’t find the light switch, but his groping hands
encountered the door to a small half bath and managed to
turn on the light over the mirror. Quentin splashed water on
his face and wandered out into the strange house.
He found the others, except for Alice and Penny, in the
dining room, where they had already made and demolished
a meal of heroic proportions, the remains of which lay
spread out on a stupendous table that looked like it was
built from the beams of the True Cross, handsomely
varnished and nailed together with authentic iron spikes.
Large pieces of modern art the color and texture of dried,
crusted blood hung on the walls.
“Q!” they shouted.
“Where’s Alice?”
“Came and went,” Josh said. “What’s going on? You
guys fighting or what?”
He shadowboxed a jab or two. He obviously didn’t know
what had happened. Anaïs, sitting next to him, delivered a
mock knockout punch to his stubbly chin. They were all
drunk again, same as last night, same as every night.
Nothing had changed.
“Seriously,” Janet said. “Did she give you that shiner?
Seems like somebody’s always punching you in the face,
Q.”Her manner was as bright and toxic as ever, but her eyes
were rimmed with red. Quentin wondered if she’d come out
of last night’s holocaust quite as unscathed as he’d thought.
“It was Ember and Umber,” he said. “The magic rams.
Didn’t Alice tell you? They punished me for being sinful.”
“Yeah?” Josh said. “Did you kick their woolly asses?”
“I turned the other cheek.” Quentin didn’t feel like talking,
but he was hungry. He got a plate from the kitchen and sat
down at the far end of the table and served himself
leftovers.
“We were talking about what to do next,” Richard said.
“Making up an actions list.”
“Right.” Josh pounded authoritatively on the heavy table.
“Who’s got some action items for me? We need to
enumerate our deliverables!”
“Food,” Richard said, straight-faced. “And if we’re really
going to Fillory, we all need to reread all the books.”
“Gold,” Anaïs chipped in gamely. “And trade items. What
do Fillorians want? Cigarettes?”
“We’re not going to Brezhnev-era Russia, Anaïs. Steel?”
“Gunpowder?”
“My God,” Eliot said. “Listen to you people. I am not
going to be the man who brought the gun to Fillory.”
“We should bring overcoats,” Richard said. “Tents. Cold-
weather gear. We have no idea what season it is there. We
could be walking into deep winter.”
Yesterday—meaning before his nap—Fillory was going
to make everything all right. Now it was hard to focus on it: it
seemed like a dream again. Now the mess with Janet and
Alice was the real thing. It would drag everything else down
with it.
He pulled himself together with an effort.“How long are we talking about going for?”
“A couple of days? Look, we can just come back if we
forget something,” Eliot said. “With the button it’s a snap.
We’ll just stay till it gets boring.”
“What should we do when we get there?”
“I think they’ll probably give us a quest,” Penny said.
“That’s what always happened to the Chatwins.”
Heads turned. Penny was standing in the doorway in a T-
shirt and sweatpants, blinking like an owl, looking like he’d
just woken up, too.
“I don’t know if we can count on that, Penny.” For some
reason it annoyed Quentin, how starry-eyed and optimistic
Penny was being about this. “It’s not like the rams
summoned us. It might not even be like the books. Maybe
there never were any quests. Plover probably just put that
stuff in so there would be a good story. Maybe we’ll just
suck around Fillory like we’re sucking around here.”
“Don’t be a killjoy,” Josh said, “just because your
girlfriend beats you up.”
Penny was shaking his head. “I just don’t see Plover
coming up with all that stuff on his own. It’s not rational. He
was a gay dry-cleaning magnate with a background in
practical chemistry. He didn’t have a creative bone in his
body. No way. It’s Occam’s razor. It’s much more likely that
he was writing it as it happened.”
“So what do you think,” Eliot said, “we’re going to meet a
damsel in distress?”
“We might. Not necessarily a damsel, but . . . you know, a
nymph maybe. Or a dwarf, or a pegasus. You know, that
needs help with something.” Everybody was laughing, but
Penny kept on going. It was almost touching. “Seriously, it
happens in the books, every time.”
Josh pushed a tiny doll glass of something clear and
alcoholic in front of Quentin, and he took a sip. It was somekind of fiery fruit eau-de-vie, and it tasted like a vital nutrient
that his body had been chronically deprived of his entire
life.
“Sure, but real life’s not actually like that,” Quentin went
on, fumbling after what he was sure was an important
insight. “You don’t just go on fun adventures for good
causes and have happy endings. You’re not going to be a
character in a story, there’s nobody arranging everything for
you. The real world just doesn’t work like that.”
“Maybe your world doesn’t, Earth man,” Josh said. He
winked. “We’re not in your world anymore.”
“And I don’t want to turn this into a theological
discussion,” Richard added, with towering dignity, “but
there is room for disagreement on that score.”
“And even if you don’t believe that this world has a god,”
Penny finished up, “you must admit that Fillory has one.
Two even.”
“This does bring us back, albeit in an insane way, to what
is actually a pretty reasonable question,” Eliot said. “Which
is what do we do when we get there?”
“We should go after that magic flower,” Josh suggested.
“You know, the one that when you smell it it automatically
makes you happy? Remember that? That thing would be
worth bank here.”
While nobody was watching, Janet caught Quentin’s eye
and waggled her eyebrows and did something lewd with
her tongue. Quentin eyed her back, unblinking. She was
actually enjoying this, he thought. She’d sabotaged him and
Alice, and she was loving it. Little montage flashes of last
night—it couldn’t possibly have just been last night—cycled
through his brain, snapshots that had stubbornly survived
the merciful angel of alcoholic erasure. Everything about
sex with Janet had been so different from Alice. The smell,
the feel of her skin, her businesslike know-how. The shame
and the fear had caught up with him even before it wasover, before he came, but he hadn’t stopped.
And had Eliot really been awake for the whole thing? His
brain dealt out a sloppy fan of mental Polaroids, out of
sequence: an image of Janet kissing Eliot, of her hand
working diligently between Eliot’s legs. Had she really been
weeping? Had he kissed Eliot? A vivid sense memory of
somebody else’s stubble, surprisingly scratchy, chafing his
cheek and upper lip.
Good God, he thought wearily. What goes on.
He had reached the outer limits of what Fun, capital F ,
could do for him. The cost was way too high, the returns
pitifully inadequate. His mind was dimly awakening, too
late, to other things that were as important, or even more
so. Poor Alice. He needed a hair shirt, or ashes, or a
scourge—there should be some ritual that he could perform
to show her how desperately sorry he was. He would do
anything, if she would just tell him what to do.
He shoved the pictures back down wherever they came
from, back into the mental shuffle, speeding them on their
way with some more of that yummy eau-de-vie. An idea
was germinating in his tired, bruised brain.
“We could find Martin Chatwin,” Richard volunteered.
“The way the other children were always trying to.”
“I’d like to bring something back for Fogg,” Eliot said.
“Something for the school. An artifact or something.”
“That’s it?” Josh said. “You’re going to Fillory to bring
back an apple for teacher? God, you’re so unbelievably
lame sometimes.”
Oddly, Eliot didn’t take the bait. This was affecting them
all in different ways.
“Maybe we could find the Questing Beast,” Quentin said
quietly.
“The what?” Josh wrinkled his forehead. No Fillory
scholar he.“From The Girl Who Told Time. Remember? The beast
that can’t be caught. Helen chases it.”
“What do you do with it if you do catch it? Eat it?”
“I don’t know. Maybe it leads you to treasure? Or gives
you some secret wisdom? Or something?” He hadn’t
thought this through completely. It had seemed important to
the Chatwins, but now he couldn’t remember why.
“You never find out,” Penny said. “Not in the books. They
never catch it, and Plover never mentions it again. It’s a
good idea. But I was thinking, you know, maybe they’ll
make us kings. Kings and queens. The way the Chatwins
were.”
As soon as Penny said it, Quentin wondered why he
hadn’t thought of it himself. It was so obvious. They’d be
kings and queens. Of course they would. If the City was
real, why not all the rest of it, even that? They could live in
Castle Whitespire. Alice could be his queen.
God, he was agreeing with Penny. That was a danger
sign if there ever was one.
“Huh.” Janet mulled this over, her ever-alert brain ticking
over. She was actually taking it seriously, too. “Would we
have to marry each other?”
“Not necessarily. The Chatwins didn’t. Then again, they
were all siblings.”
“I don’t know,” said Anaïs. “It sounds like a big job, being
queen. There is probably bureaucracy. Administration.”
“Lucrative though. Think of the perks.”
“If the books are even accurate,” Eliot said. “And if the
thrones are vacant. That’s two big ifs. Plus there’s seven of
us and only four thrones. Three people get left out.”
“I’ll tell you what we need,” Anaïs said. “We need war
magic. Battle magic. Offense, defense. We need to be able
to hurt people if we have to.”Janet looked amused.
“Shit’s illegal, babe,” she said, obviously impressed
despite herself. “You know that.”
“I don’t care if it is.” Anaïs shook her precious blond curls.
“We need it. We have no idea what we will be seeing when
we cross over. We have to be ready. Unless any of you big
strong men knows how to use a sword?” There was
silence, and she smirked. “Alors.”
“Did they teach you that stuff where you went?” Josh
asked. He looked a little afraid of her.
“We are not so pure in Europe as you Americans, I
guess.”
Penny was nodding. “Battle magic isn’t illegal in Fillory.”
“Out of the question,” Richard said crisply. “Do you
realize the kind of heat you’d bring down on us? Who here
besides me has dealt with the Magicians’ Court?
Anybody?”
“We’re already in the shit, Richard,” Eliot said. “You think
that button would be legal if the court knew about it? If you
want out, get out now, but Anaïs is right. I’m not going over
there with just my dick in my hand.”
“We can get a dispensation for small arms,” Richard
went on primly. “There are precedents for that. I know the
forms.”
“Guns?” Eliot made a sour face. “What is wrong with
you? Fillory is a pristine society. Have you ever even
watched Star Trek ? This is basic Prime Directive stuff. We
have a chance to experience a world that has not yet been
fucked up by assholes. Do any of you get how important
that is? Any of you?”
Quentin kept expecting Eliot to declare himself too cool
for the whole Fillory project and start making snarky jokes
about it, but he was turning out to be surprisingly focusedand unironic about it. Quentin couldn’t remember the last
time Eliot had been openly enthusiastic about anything. It
was a relief to see that he could still admit that he cared
about something.
“I do not want to be around Penny with a gun,” Janet said
firmly.
“Look, Anaïs is right,” Eliot said. “We’ll work up some
basic attack spells, just in case. Nothing too insane. We’ll
just have a couple of aces in the hole. And we have those
cacodemons in our backs, don’t forget. And the button.”
“And our dicks in our hands.” Anaïs giggled.
The next day Richard, Eliot, Janet, and Anaïs drove into
Buffalo to shop for supplies; Janet, being from L.A., was the
only one who had a driver’s license. Quentin, Josh, Alice,
and Penny were supposed to be researching battle magic,
but Alice wouldn’t speak to Quentin—he had knocked on
her door that morning, but she wouldn’t come out—and the
technicalities were beyond Josh, so it came down to Alice
and Penny working together.
Soon the big dining room table was covered with books
from Penny’s U-haul stash and sheets of butcher paper
crawling with flow charts. They were deep into it. As the two
biggest magic nerds of the group, Alice and Penny were
completely absorbed in each other, speaking some ad hoc
technical jargon they came up with on the fly, Penny
scribbling reams of archaic notations and Alice nodding
seriously over his shoulder and pointing. They were doing
original work, building spells from scratch; it wasn’t
fantastically difficult stuff, but any prior art in the area had
been thoroughly suppressed.
Watching them work, Quentin was consumed with
jealousy. Thank God it was Penny—anybody else and he
would have been seriously suspicious. He and Josh spentthe afternoon in the den with some beer and Smart Food
watching cable on a flat-screen TV the size of a billboard.
There had been no TV at Brakebills, or in their Manhattan
apartment, and it felt exotic and forbidden.
Around five o’clock Eliot came and roused them.
“Come on,” he said. “You’re missing Penny’s big show.”
“How was Buffalo?”
“Like a vision of the apocalypse. We bought parkas and
hunting knives.”
They trailed Eliot out to the backyard. Seeing him happy
and excited and reasonably sober restored Quentin’s faith
in the possibility that they were on the right track, that
everything broken was fixable. He grabbed a scarf and a
bizarre Russian hat with earflaps that he found in a closet.
The sun was setting behind the Adirondacks in the
distance, cold and red and desolate through the haze. The
others were grouped at the bottom of the lawn, which
sloped down to a row of bare, decorative lindens. Penny
was sighting down his arm at one of the trees while Alice
paced off distance in long, even steps. She jogged over to
Penny and they whispered, then she paced off the distance
again. Janet stood to one side with Richard, looking
adorable in a pink parka and a woolly watch cap.
“All right!” Penny called. “Stand back, everybody.”
“How much farther back can we stand?” Josh asked.
Sitting on a broken white marble balustrade, a random
architectural element dropped in by the landscaper, he took
a nip from a bottle of schnapps and passed it to Eliot.
“Just so you’re standing back. Okay, fire in the hole.”
Like a sequined assistant, Alice stepped up to an end
table on the green, placed an empty wine bottle on it, and
stepped away.
Facing the bottle, Penny took a quick breath and spoke arapid sequence of clipped syllables under his breath,
ending with a one-handed flicking gesture. Something—a
spray of three somethings, steely gray and tightly grouped
—shot out of his fingertips, too fast to follow, and flickered
across the lawn. Two of them missed, but one of them
snapped the bottle’s neck off cleanly, leaving the base
standing headlessly upright.
Penny grinned. There was scattered applause.
“We call it ‘Magic Missile,’ ” he said.
“Magic Missile, baby!” Josh’s breath steamed in the cold
air. His face was radiant with excitement. “That’s straight up
Dungeons & Dragons shit!”
Penny nodded.
“We actually based some of this on old D & D spells.
There’s a lot of practical thinking in those books.”
Quentin wasn’t smiling. Wasn’t anybody going to say
anything? This was dark magic. God knows he wasn’t a
prude, but this was a spell meant to break up flesh, to
physically wound. They were crossing so many lines it was
hard to figure out where they were anymore. If they ever
actually had to cast this stuff, it would already be too late.
“God, I hope we don’t have to use that,” was all he said
out loud.
“Oh, come on, Quen tina . We’re not looking for trouble.
We just want to be ready if it comes.” Josh could hardly
contain himself. “Dungeons & Dragons, motherfucker!”
Next Alice whisked the card table away so that Penny
stood alone, facing the dark line of lindens. The others
stood and sat scattered behind him, under the empty
sunset sky. The sun was almost down now. Their noses
were running and their ears were red, but the cold didn’t
seem to bother Penny, who was still wearing only a T-shirt
and sweatpants. They were really in the middle of nowhere.
Quentin was used to the background blare and hum ofManhattan, and even at Brakebills there were so many
people around, there had always been someone
somewhere yelling or knocking something over or blowing
something up. Here, when the wind wasn’t sighing moodily
in the trees, there was nothing. The whole world was on
mute.
He tied down the earflaps of his Russian hat with a string.
“If this doesn’t work—” Penny began.
“Just do it already!” Janet said. “It’s cold out here!”
Penny did a deep knee-bend and spat on the gray-brown
grass. Then he executed a grotesque, wild-armed flailing
movement, at odds with what Quentin had seen of his
otherwise highly disciplined style. Violet light sputtered in
his cupped hands in the darkness so that the bones in his
fingers were visible through the skin. He shouted something
and finished with an overarm pitching motion.
A small, dense, orange spark left Penny’s palm and flew
across the grass, dead level. At first it looked absurdly
inoffensive, silly, like a toy, or an insect. But as it sailed
toward the trees it grew, blooming into a fiery sparking
comet the size of a beach ball, veined and roiling and
snapping. It was almost stately, spinning slowly backward
as it moved through the cold dusk air. Shadows wound
across the lawn, shifting with the fast-moving light source.
The heat was intense; Quentin felt it on his face. When it hit
a linden, the whole tree went up at once with a single loud
crackling woof . A gout of flame ascended into the sky and
vanished.
“Fireball!” Penny called out unnecessarily.
It was an instant bonfire. The tree burned fast and merrily.
Sparks flew up impossibly high into the twilight sky. Janet
whooped and jumped up and down and clapped her hands
like a cheerleader. Penny smiled thinly and took a theatrical
bow.They stayed at the house upstate for a few more days,
lounging around, grilling on the back patio, drinking up all
the good wine, going through the DVD collection, all
cramming into the hot tub and then not cleaning it afterward.
The fact was, Quentin realized, after all the buildup, all the
hasty preparation and rush-rush-rush, they were stalling,
vamping, waiting for something to push them into pulling the
trigger. They were so excited they didn’t see how terrified
they were. And when he thought about all the happiness
waiting for him in Fillory, Quentin almost felt like he didn’t
deserve it. He wasn’t ready. Ember and Umber would
never have summoned someone like him.
In the meantime Alice had somehow figured out a way of
never being in the same room as Quentin at the same time.
She’d developed a sixth sense about him—he’d catch a
glimpse of her out a window, or a flash of her feet as she
vanished upstairs, but that was as close as they came. It
was almost like a game; the others played it, too. When he
did spot her in the open—sitting up on the kitchen counter,
kicking her legs and chatting with Josh, or hunched over the
dining room table with Penny and his books, like everything
was fine—he didn’t dare intrude. That would be against the
rules of the game. Seeing her there, so close and at the
same time so infinitely removed, was like looking through a
doorway into another universe, a warm, sunny, tropical
dimension that he had once inhabited, but from which he
was now banished. Every night he left flowers outside her
bedroom door.
It was a shame: he probably never even had to know
what happened. He could easily have missed it. Though
maybe they would have stayed there forever if he had. He
stayed up late one night, playing cards with Josh and Eliot.
Playing cards with magicians always degenerated into a
meta-contest over who was better at warping the odds, so
that practically every hand came up four aces against a
couple of straight flushes. Quentin was, tentatively, feelingbetter. They were drinking grappa. The twisted knot of
shame and regret in his chest that had been there since the
night with Janet was gradually coming undone, or at least
scarring over. It wasn’t nothing, but it wasn’t everything
either. There was so much right between him and Alice.
They could get past this.
Maybe it was time he helped her see that. He knew she
wanted to. He’d screwed up, he was sorry, they would get
past it. QED. They just needed to get it into perspective.
She was probably just waiting for him to say it. He excused
himself and headed up the stairs to the third floor, where
the master bedroom was. Josh and Eliot gamely rooted
him on his way:
“Q! Q! Q! Q!”
When he was almost at the top of the stairs, he stopped.
Quentin would have known it anywhere, the sound that Alice
made when she was having sex. Now here was a
conundrum for his drunken mind to reflect on: she was
making it now, but it wasn’t Quentin who was making her
make it. He stared down at the burnt-orange natural-weave
fibers of the runner that ran down the middle of the stairs.
He could not be hearing that sound. It came in through his
ears and made spots appear in his vision. His blood fizzed
like a science experiment and turned to acid. The acid
propagated through his body and made his arms and legs
and brain burn. Then it made its way to his heart, like a
deadly blood clot that had broken loose and was drifting
free, bringing death with it. When it reached his heart, his
heart turned white hot.
She was with Penny or Richard, obviously. He had just
left Josh and Eliot, and they would never do that to him
anyway. He walked stiff-legged back down the stairs and
down the hall to Richard’s room and kicked open the door
and slapped the light on. Richard was there in bed, alone.
He sat bolt upright, blinking in an asinine Victorian
nightshirt. Quentin turned off the light and slammed the door
shut again.Janet came out into the hall in pajamas, frowning.
“What’s going on?”
He shouldered roughly past her.
“Hey!” she yelled after him. “That hurt!”
Hurt? What did she know about hurt? He snapped on the
lamp in Penny’s room. Penny’s bed was empty. He picked
up the lamp and threw it on the floor. It flashed and died.
Quentin had never felt like this before. It was kind of
amazing: his anger was making him superpowered. He
could do anything. There was literally nothing he could not
do. Or almost. He tried to rip down Penny’s curtains, but
they wouldn’t come, even when he hung on them with all his
weight. Instead he opened the window and ripped the
clothes off the bed and stuffed them out through it. Not bad,
but not enough. He spiked the alarm clock, then started
pulling books off the shelves.
Penny had a lot of books. It was going to take a while to
get them all off the shelves. But that was okay, he had all
night, and he had all the energy in the world. Wasn’t even
sleepy. It was like he was on speed. Except that after a
while it got harder to pull the books off the shelves because
Josh and Richard were holding his arms. Quentin thrashed
insanely, like a toddler having a tantrum. They dragged him
out into the hall.
It was so stupid, really. So obvious. Certainly you couldn’t
call it clever. He fucked Janet; she fucks Penny. They
should be even now. But he’d been drunk! How did that
make them even? He barely knew what he was doing! How
did that make them even? And Penny—Jesus. He wished it
had been Josh.
They confined him to the den, gave him the bottle of
grappa and a stack of DVDs and figured he’d knock
himself out. Josh stayed there to make sure Quentin didn’t
try any magic, as worked up as he was, but he nodded off
right away, his round cheek on the hard arm of the couch,like a sleepy apostle.
As for Quentin, sleep didn’t interest him right now. The
pain was a falling feeling. It was a little like coming off the
ecstasy, that long descent. He was like a cartoon character
who falls off a building. Pow, he hits an awning, but he
punches straight through it. Pow, he hits another one. And
another one. Surely one of them will catch him and sproing
him back up, or just fold up and embrace him like a canvas
cradle, but it doesn’t, it’s just one flimsy busted awning after
another. Down and down and down. After a while he longs
to stop, even if it means hitting the sidewalk, but he doesn’t,
he just keeps falling, down through awning after awning,
deeper and deeper into the pain. Turtles all the way down.
Quentin didn’t bother with the DVDs, just flipped
channels on the huge TV and slugged straight from the
bottle until sunlight came bleeding up over the horizon, like
more acid blood oozing out of his sick ruptured heart, which
felt—not that anybody cared—like a rotten drum of
biohazardous waste at the very bottom of a landfill, leaching
poison into the groundwater, enough poison to kill an entire
suburb full of innocent and unsuspecting children.
He never did fall asleep. The idea came over him around
dawn, and he waited as long as he could, but it was just too
damn good to keep to himself. He was like a kid on
Christmas morning who couldn’t wait for the grown-ups to
waken. Santa was here, and he was going to fix everything.
At seven thirty, still half drunk, he busted out of the den and
went down the hallways banging on doors. What the hell, he
even climbed the stairs and kicked open Alice’s door,
caught a glimpse of Penny’s bare white plump rump, which
he didn’t really need to see. It made him wince and turn
away. But it didn’t shut him up.
“Okay!” he was shouting. “People! Get up, get up, get up!
It’s time! Today’s the day! People, people, people!”
He sang a verse of James’s stupid middle school song:
In olden times there was a boyYoung and strong and brave-o
He was a cheerleader now, waving his pom-poms,
jumping up and down, doing splits on the parquet, shouting
as loud as he could.
“We! Are! Going! To!
“Fill!
“O!
“Reeeeeee!”BOOK IIIFILLORY
They held hands in a circle in the living room, packs on their
backs. It felt like a dorm stunt, like they were all about to
drop acid or sing an a cappella show tune or set some kind
of wacky campus record. Anaïs’s face a blazed with
excitement. She hopped up and down despite the load on
her back. None of last night’s drama had registered on her
at all. She was the only person in the room who looked
happy to be there.
The funny thing was that it had worked. Quentin wouldn’t
let it alone, he kept hounding them, and eventually, with
surprisingly little resistance, they gave in. Today would be
the day. Partly they were afraid of him, with his scary
glittering pain-eyes, but partly it was because they had to
admit he was right: it was time to go, and they’d just been
waiting for somebody, even somebody as obviously drunk
and demented as Quentin was, to stand up and call it.
Looking back, in a philosophical frame of mind, it
occurred to Quen tin that he’d always thought this would be
a happy day, the happiest day of his life. Funny how life had
its little ways of surprising you. Little quirks of fate.
If he wasn’t happy, he did feel unexpectedly liberated. At
least he wasn’t hunched over with shame anymore. This
was pure emotion, unalloyed with any misgivings or
caveats or qualifications. Alice was no longer the alabaster
saint here. It was not so hard to meet her eyes across the
circle. And was that a flicker of embarrassment he saw in
hers? Maybe she was learning a little something about
remorse, what that felt like. They were down in the muck
together now.
They had spent the morning gathering up and packing
the gear and the supplies that were already basically
gathered up and packed anyway, and rounding up whoever
was in the bathroom or dithering over which shoes or hadjust wandered off out onto the lawn for no obvious reason.
Finally they were all together in the living room in a circle,
shifting their weight from foot to foot and looking at each
other and saying:
“Okay?”
“Okay?”
“Everybody okay?”
“Let’s do it.”
“Let’s do this!”
“Okay!”
“Okay!”
“Let’s—”
And then Penny must have touched the button, because
they were all rising up together through clear, cold water.
Quentin was first out of the pool, his pack weighing him
down. He was sober now, he was pretty sure, but still angry,
angry, angry, and brimming over with self-pity. Let it flow.
He didn’t want to touch anybody or have anybody touch
him. He liked being in the Neitherlands though. The
Neitherlands had a calming effect. Quiet and still. If he could
just lie down for a minute, just right here on the old worn
stones, just for a minute, maybe he could sleep.
The expensive Persian rug they’d been standing on
floated up after them in the water. Somehow it had come
through by accident. Had the button mistaken it for their
clothing? Funny how these things worked.
Quentin waited while the others straggled out of the
fountain one by one. They bunched up at the edge, treading
water and hanging on to each other, then heaving their
backpacks out and crawling up after them over the stonerim. Janet looked pale. She was stuck in the water, with
Josh and Eliot on either side helping her stay afloat. She
couldn’t get over the lip of the fountain. Her eyes were
unfocused, and her face was chalk.
“I don’t know, I just—” She kept shaking her head and
repeating it over and over again: “I don’t know what’s wrong
—”
Together they dragged her up out of the water, but there
was no strength in her limbs. Her knees buckled and she
dropped to all fours, and the weight of her pack tugged her
over onto her side on the paving stones. She lay there wet
and blinking. It’s not like Quentin had never seen Janet
incapacitated before, but this was different.
“I don’t know if I wanna throw up or if I don’t,” she said
slowly.
“Something’s wrong,” Alice said. “The City. She’s having
an allergic reaction, something like that.”
Her voice was not overburdened with sympathy.
“Is anybody else getting it?” Eliot looked around quickly,
assuming command of the operation. “Nobody else, okay.
Let’s go to phase two. Let’s hurry.”
“I’m okay, just let me rest. I just—Jesus, don’t you feel it?”
Janet looked up helplessly at the others, gulping air.
“Doesn’t anybody else feel it?”
Anaïs kneeled down next to her in sisterly solidarity. Alice
regarded her inscrutably. Nobody else was affected.
“This is interesting,” Penny said. “Now why doesn’t
anybody else—?”
“Hey. Asshole.” Quentin snapped his fingers in Penny’s
face. He had no problem with naked hostility right now. He
was feeling very uninhibited. “Can’t you see she’s in pain?
Phase two, asshole, let’s go.”
He hoped Penny would come after him, maybe theycould have a rematch of their little fight club. But Penny just
gave Quentin a calm assessing look and turned away. He
was taking full advantage of the opportunity to rise above,
to be the bigger man, the gracious winner. He rattled a
spray can of industrial-orange paint and circled the fountain
with it, marking the ground with crosses, then set off in the
direction he called palaceward, after the lavish white
palazzo on that side of the square. It was no mystery where
they were going: the scene in the book was written in
Plover’s characteristically clear, unambiguous prose. It had
the Chatwins walking three more squares palaceward and
then one to the left to get to the fountain that led to Fillory.
The rest of the group straggled after him, squelching in their
wet clothes. Janet had her arms around Quentin’s and
Eliot’s shoulders.
The last jog took them across a stone bridge over a
narrow canal. The layout of the city reminded Quentin of a
welters board, but writ large. Maybe the game reflected
some distant, barely legible rumor of the Neitherlands that
had filtered down to Earth.
They halted in a tidy square that was smaller than the one
they’d started in, and dominated by a large, dignified stone
hall that might have been the mayoral seat of a medieval
French village. The clock set at the peak of its facade was
frozen at noon, or midnight. The rain was getting heavier. In
the center of the square was a round fountain, a figure of
Atlas half crushed beneath a bronze globe.
“Okay!” Penny spoke unnecessarily loudly. The big
ringmaster. He was nervous, Quentin could see. Not so
tough now, loverman. “This is the one they use in the books.
So I’m going through to check weather conditions.”
“What do you want, a drum roll?” Janet snapped through
clenched teeth. “Go!”
Penny took the white button out of his pocket and
gripped it in his fist. Taking a deep breath, he mounted the
lip of the pool and stepped off, straight-legged, into the still
water. At the last moment he reflexively held his nose withone hand. He dropped into the dark water and
disappeared. It had swallowed him up.
There was a long hush. The only sound was Janet’s
hoarse panting and the splashing of the fountain. A minute
passed. Then Penny’s head broke the surface, sputtering
and blowing.
“It worked!” he shouted. “It’s warm! It’s summer! It’s
summer there!”
“Was it Fillory?” Josh asked.
“I don’t know!” He dog-paddled over to the lip of the pool,
breathing hard. “It’s a forest. Rural. No signs of habitation.”
“Good enough,” Eliot said. “Let’s go.”
“I’m okay,” Janet said.
“No, you’re not. Let’s go, everybody.”
Richard was already going through the packs, tossing
out the winter gear, the brand-new parkas and woolly hats
and electric socks, in an expensive multicolored heap.
“Line up sitting along the edge,” he said over his
shoulder. “Feet in the water, holding hands.”
Quentin wanted to say something sarcastic but couldn’t
think of anything. There were heavy rusted iron rings set
into the edge of the pool. They had stained the stone
around them a dark ferrous brown. He lowered his feet into
the inky water. The water felt slightly thinner than real water,
more the consistency of rubbing alcohol. He stared down at
his submerged shoes. He could barely make them out.
Some tiny sane part of him knew he was out of control,
but that wasn’t the part of him that had its hands on the
wheel. Everything anybody said sounded to him like a nasty
double entendre calculated to remind him of Alice and
Penny. Atlas appeared to be leering at him. He was dizzy
from lack of sleep. He closed his eyes. His head felt huge
and diffuse and empty, like a puff of cloud hanging abovehis shoulders. The cloud began to drift away. He wondered
if he was going pass out. He would dearly love to pass out.
There was a dead spot in his brain, and he wanted the
dead spot to spread and metastasize over the whole of it
and blot out all the painful thoughts.
“Body armor?” Eliot was saying. “Jesus, Anaïs, have you
even read the books? We’re not walking into a firefight.
We’re probably going to be eating scones with a talking
bunny.”
“Okay?” Penny called. “Everybody?”
They were all sitting, all eight of them, in an arc around
the edge of the fountain, scooched forward so they could
drop in without using their hands, which were tightly
clasped. Janet lolled on Eliot’s shoulder, her white neck
exposed. She was out cold; she looked terribly vulnerable.
To Quen tin’s right, Josh was studying him with concern.
His huge hand squeezed Quentin’s.
“It’s okay, man,” he whispered. “Come on. You’re okay.
You got this.”
Probably everybody took a last look around, locked eyes,
felt a frisson. Eliot quoted Tennyson’s “Ulysses” about
seeking new worlds and sailing beyond the sunset.
Somebody whooped—maybe Anaïs, the whoop had a
Francophone quality. But Quentin didn’t whoop, and he
didn’t look. He just stared at his lap and waited for each
successive second to impose itself on him in turn like an
uninvited guest the way the previous one had. On Penny’s
signal they dropped into the fountain together, not quite in
sync but almost—it had a Busby Berkeley feel to it. Janet
more or less face-planted forward into the water.
It was a falling down, a plunge: outbound from the
Neitherlands meant descending. It was like they were
parachuting, only it was too rapid for that, somewhere
between parachuting and straight free-falling, but with no
rushing wind. For a long silent moment they could see
everything: a sea of flourishing leafy canopies extending allthe way to the horizon, pre-industrially verdant, giving way to
square meadows in one direction that Quentin tentatively
tagged as north, as reckoned by a pallid sun in a white sky.
He tried to keep an eye on it as they went in. The ground
rushed up to slam them.
Then, just like that, they were down. Quentin flexed his
knees instinctively, but there was no impact or sense of
momentum absorbed. All at once they were just standing
there.
But where was there? It wasn’t a clearing exactly. It was
more like a shallow ditch, a trench running through a forest,
the bottom clogged with dead leaves and loam and twiggy
arboreal detritus. Quentin steadied himself with one hand
on the sloping bank. Light trickled down thinly through the
massed branches overhead. A bird chattered and then left
off. The silence was deep and thick.
They had been scattered by the transition, like a freshly
deployed stick of paratroopers, but they were still in sight of
one another. Richard and Penny were fighting their way out
of a huge dead bush. Alice and Anaïs were seated on the
trunk of a colossal tree that had fallen athwart the ditch, as if
they’d been carefully placed there by a giant child arranging
dolls. Janet was sitting on the ground with her hands on her
thighs, taking deep breaths, the color flooding back into her
face.
The whole scene had a deeply uncurated feel to it. This
was not a forest that had been culled or thinned. This was
primeval. This was the way trees lived when they were left
to their own devices.
“Penny?” Josh stood on the edge of the ditch, gazing
down at the rest of them, hands in pockets. He looked
incongruously natty in a jacket and a nice shirt, no tie, even
though they were all soaked to the bone. “It’s cold, Penny.
Why the fuck is it cold?”
It was true. The air was dry and bitter; their clothes were
freezing fast. Their breath puffed out white in the frigidstillness. Fine light snow sifted down from the white sky.
The ground was hard under the fallen leaves. It was deep
winter.
“I don’t know.” Penny looked around, frowning. “It was
summer before,” he said a little petulantly. “Just a second
ago! It was hot!”
“Will someone please help me down, please?” Anaïs
was looking down at the ground dubiously from her perch
on the giant tree trunk. Josh gallantly took her by her narrow
waist and lifted her down; she gave a pleased little squeak.
“It’s the time thing,” Alice said. “I just thought of it. It could
be six months since Penny was here, in Fillory time. Or
more like sixty years, the way the seasons work. This
always happens in the books. There’s no way to predict it.”
“Well, I predict that I’m going to freeze my tits off in five
minutes,” Janet said. “Somebody go back for the jackets.”
They all agreed that Penny should go back and get the
parkas, and he was an instant away from touching the
button when Eliot suddenly lunged at him and grabbed his
arm. He pointed out, as calmly as possible, that if the time
streams of Fillory and the Neitherlands moved at different
speeds, then if Penny went back by himself, it could easily
be days, or years, before he got back to Fillory with the
gear, at least from the Fillorian point of view, by which time
they could have frozen to death or died of old age or
accumulated countless other equally serious problems. If
they were going to go, they would all have to go together.
“Forget it.” Janet shook her head. She still looked green.
“I can’t go back there. Not yet. I’d rather freeze my tits off
than puke my guts out.”
Nobody argued. Nobody wanted to leave quite yet
anyway, not now that they were finally here in Fillory, or
wherever they were. They weren’t going anywhere without
at least poking around. Penny began making the rounds
with his clothes-drying spell.“I think I can see a way to go,” said Alice, who was still
perched up on the tree trunk. Snow had begun to settle in
her dark hair. “On the other side. It sort of turns into a path
through the forest. And there’s something else, too. You’re
going to want to see this for yourselves.”
If they took off their packs, there was enough space at
the bottom of the ditch to scramble under the huge trunk on
all fours, single file, their hands and knees sinking into the
thick layer of frostbitten leaves. Eliot came through last,
passing the packs ahead of him. They stood up on the
other side, slapping dirt off their hands. Penny rushed to
hand Alice down from where she sat, but she ignored him
and jumped down herself, although it meant crashing down
on her hands and knees and picking herself up again. She
didn’t seem to be particularly relishing her adventure of the
night before, Quentin thought.
To one side of the path was a small spreading oak. Its
bark was dark gray, almost black, and its branches were
gnarled and wiggly and all but empty of leaves. Embedded
in its trunk at head height, as if the tree had simply grown
up around it, was a round ticking clock face a foot across.
One by one, without speaking, they all scrambled up the
sloping bank to get a closer look. It was one of the
Watcherwoman’s clock-trees.
Quentin touched the place where the tree’s hard rough
bark met the smooth silver bezel around the clock face. It
was solid and cold and real. He closed his eyes and
followed the curve of it with his finger. He was really here.
He was in Fillory. There was no question about it now.
And now that he was here it would finally be all right. He
didn’t see how yet, but it would. It had to be. Maybe it was
the lack of sleep, but hot tears poured helplessly down his
cheeks, leaving cold tracks behind them. Against all his
own wishes and instincts he got down on his knees and put
his head in his hands and pushed his face into the cold
leaves. A sob clawed its way out of him. For a minute he
lost himself. Somebody, he would never know who, notAlice, put their hand on his shoulder. This was the place. He
would be picked up, cleaned off, and made to feel safe and
happy and whole again here. How had everything gone so
wrong? How could he and Alice have been so stupid? It
barely even mattered now. This was his life now, the life he
had always been waiting for. It was finally here.
And it flashed into his head with sudden urgency: Richard
was right. They had to find Martin Chatwin, if he was
somehow still alive. That was the key. Now that he was
here, he wasn’t going to give it up again. He must know the
secret of how to stay here forever, make it last, make it
permanent.
Quentin got to his feet, embarrassed, and blotted his
tears on his sleeve.
“Welp,” Josh said finally, breaking the silence. “I guess
that pretty much tears it. We’re in Fillory.”
“These clock-trees are supposed to be the
Watcherwoman’s thing,” Quentin said, still sniffling. “She
must still be around.”
“I thought she was dead,” Janet said.
“Maybe we’re in an earlier time period,” Alice suggested.
“Maybe we went back in time. Like in The Girl Who Told
Time .”
She and Janet and Quentin didn’t look at each other
when they spoke.
“Maybe. I think they left some of these still growing,
though, even after they got rid of her. Remember they even
see one in The Wandering Dune .”
“I could never finish that book,” Josh said.
“I wonder.” Eliot eyed it appraisingly. “Think we could get
this thing back to Brakebills? That would make a hell of a
present for Fogg.”
Nobody else seemed inclined to pursue that line ofspeculation. Josh made double pointy-fingers at Eliot and
mouthed the word douche.
“I wonder if that’s the correct time,” Richard said.
Quentin could have stood there and stared at the clock-
tree all day, but the chill wouldn’t let them stand still. The
girls were already wandering away. He followed them
reluctantly, and soon they were all trooping off together in a
ragged group along the ditch-cum-path, deeper into Fillory.
The sound of their feet shuffling through the dry leaves was
deafening in the quiet.
No one spoke. For all their careful practical preparations
there had been very little discussion of strategy or
objectives, and now they were here it was obvious anyway.
Why bother planning an adventure? This was Fillory—
adventure would find them! With every step they took they
half expected a marvelous apparition or revelation to come
trotting out of the woods. But nothing much presented itself.
It was almost anticlimactic—or was this just the buildup to
something really amazing? The remains of ragged stone
walls trailed off into the underbrush. The trees around them
remained still and stubbornly inanimate, even after Penny,
in the spirit of exploration and discovery, formally
introduced himself to several of them. Here and there birds
chirped and flitted and perched, high up in the trees, but
none of them offered them any advice. Every little detail
looked superbright and saturated with meaning, as if the
world around them were literally composed of words and
letters, inscribed in some magical geographical script.
Richard took out a compass but found the needle stuck,
pinned down against its cardboard backing, as if Fillory’s
magnetic pole were deep underground, straight down
beneath their feet. He flung it away into a bush. Janet
hopped up and down as she walked, her hands crammed
under her armpits against the cold. Josh speculated about
the hypothetical contents of an imaginary porn magazine for
intelligent trees that would be entitled Enthouse .They walked for twenty minutes, half an hour at most.
Quentin alternately blew into his hands and withdrew them
into the sleeves of his sweater. He was wide awake now,
and sober, at least for the moment.
“We need to get some fauns up in this piece,” Josh said,
to nobody. “Or some swordfights or whatever.”
The path meandered and then faded out. They were
expending more and more effort just to push their way
through the foliage. There was some internal disagreement
as to whether or not there had ever been an actual path, or
whether it was just a strip of thin forest, or even whether—
this was Penny’s take—the trees had begun subtly,
imperceptibly shifting themselves to get in their way. But
before they could arrive at a consensus they came across a
stream percolating through the woods.
It was a lovely little winter stream, wide and shallow and
perfectly clear, twinkling and lapping along as if it were
delighted to have just found this twisty channel. Wordlessly,
they gathered at its edge. The rocks were capped with
round dollops of snow, and the quieter eddies along the
banks had iced over. A branch poking up in the middle of
the stream was hung with fabulous Gothic-sculpted icy
drops and buttresses all along its length. There was nothing
overtly supernatural about it, but it temporarily satisfied their
appetite for wonder. On Earth it would have been a
charming little rill, nothing more, but the fact that they were
seeing it in Fillory, in another world, possibly the first Earth
beings ever to do so, made it a glittering miracle.
They had stared at it for a full minute in rapt silence
before Quentin realized that right in front of them, emerging
from the deepest part of the stream, was a woman’s naked
head and shoulders.
“Oh my God,” he said. He took a clumsy, numb step
backward, pointing. “Shit. You guys.”
It was surreal. She was almost certainly dead. The
woman’s hair was dark and wet and thick with clumped ice.Her eyes—she appeared to be looking right at them—were
midnight blue and didn’t move or blink, and her skin was a
pale pearlescent gray. Her shoulders were bare. She
looked sixteen at most. Her eyelashes were clotted with
frost.
“Is she—?” Alice didn’t finish the question.
“Hey!” Janet called. “Are you all right?”
“We should help her. Get her out of there.” Quentin tried
to get closer, but he slipped on a frozen rock and went in up
to his knee. He scrambled back onto the bank, his foot
burning with cold. The woman didn’t move. “We need rope.
Get the rope, there’s rope in one of the packs.”
The water didn’t even look deep enough to submerge her
that far, and Quentin actually wondered, horribly, if they
were looking at a body that had been severed at the waist
and then dumped in the water. Rope, what was he thinking?
He was a damn magician. He dropped the pack he was
rifling through and began a simple kinetic spell to lift her
out.
He felt the premonitory warmth of a developing spell in
his fingertips, felt the weight and tug of the body in his mind.
It felt good to do magic again, to know that he could still
focus despite everything. As soon as he started he realized
that the Circumstances were scrambled here—different
stars, different seas, different everything. Thank God it was
a simple spell. The grammar was a shambles—Alice
corrected him in a clipped voice as he worked. Gradually
the woman rose up dripping out of the water. She was
whole, thank God, and naked—her body was slim, her
breasts slight and girlish. Her nails and nipples were pale
purple. She looked frozen, but she shuddered as the magic
took hold. Her eyes focused and came awake. She
frowned and raised one hand, somehow halting the spell
before he was finished, with her toes still trailing in the
freezing water.
“I am a naiad. I cannot leave the stream.” By her voiceshe could have been in junior high. Her eyes met Quentin’s.
“Your magic is clumsy,” she added.
It was electrifying. Quentin saw now that she wasn’t
human, her fingers and toes were webbed. To his left he
heard a shuffling noise. It was Penny. He was getting down
on his knees on the snowy bank.
“We humbly apologize,” he said, head bowed. “We most
humbly seek your pardon.”
“Jesus Christ!” Josh stage-whispered. “Dork!”
The hovering nymph shifted her attention. Stream water
rilled down her bare skin. She tilted her head girlishly.
“You admire my beauty, human?” she asked Penny. “I am
cold. Would you warm me with your burning skin?”
“Please,” Penny went on, blushing furiously. “If you have a
quest to bestow upon us, we would gladly undertake it. We
would gladly—”
Mercifully Janet cut him off.
“We’re visitors from Earth,” she said firmly. “Is there a city
around here that you could direct us to? Maybe Castle
Whitespire?”
“—we would gladly undertake to do your bidding,” Penny
finished.
“Do you serve the rams?” Alice asked.
“I serve no false gods, human girl. Or goddesses. I serve
the river, and the river serves me.”
“Are there other humans here?” Anaïs said. “Like us?”
“Like you?” The nymph smiled saucily, and the tip of a
startling blue tongue appeared for an instant between her
rather sharp-looking front teeth. “Oh, no. Not like you. None
so cursed!”
At that moment Quentin felt his telekinetic spell cease toexist. She’d abolished it, though he didn’t catch how,
without a word or a gesture. In the same instant the naiad
flipped head down and dived, her pale periwinkle buttocks
flashing in the air, and vanished into dark water that looked
too shallow to contain her.
Her head poked up again a moment later.
“I fear for you here, human children. This is not your war.”
“We’re not children,” Janet said.
“What war?” Quentin called.
She smiled again. Between her lavender lips her teeth
were pointy and interlocking like a fighting fish’s. She held
something dripping in her webbed fist.
“A gift from the river. Use it when all hope is lost.”
She tossed it at them overhand. Quentin caught it one-
handed; he was relieved out of all proportion to its actual
importance that he didn’t bobble it. Thank God for his old
juggling reflexes. When he looked up again, the nymph was
gone. They were alone with the chattering brook.
Quentin was holding a small ivory horn chased with silver.
“Oh- kay! ” Josh shouted. He clapped his hands and
rubbed them together. “We are definitely not in Kansas
anymore!”
The others gathered around to look at the horn. Quentin
handed it to Eliot, who turned it over a few times, peered
into one end, then the other.
“I don’t feel anything on it at all,” Eliot said. “Looks like
something you’d buy in an airport gift shop.”
“You wouldn’t necessarily feel it,” Penny said
proprietarily. He took it and stowed the horn in his pack.
“We should have asked her if this is Fillory,” Alice said
quietly.
“Of course it’s Fillory,” Penny said.“I’d like to be sure. And I’d like to know why we’re
cursed.”
“And what’s this war?” Richard asked, his heavy brows
knotted. “This raises a lot of questions.”
“And I didn’t like those teeth,” Alice added.
“Jesus,” Josh said. “Jesus! That was a naiad, people!
We just saw a river nymph! How cool is that? How cool are
we? Huh? Fuckin’ Fillory, people!”
He grabbed Quentin’s shoulders and shook him. He ran
at Richard and made him bump chests.
“Can I just say that she was pretty hot?” said Janet.
“Shyeah! I’ll take that over a faun any day,” Josh said.
Anaïs swatted him.
“Hey, that’s Penny’s girlfriend you’re talking about,” Janet
said. “Show some respect.”
The tension faded, and for a minute they all chattered
among themselves, giving one another shit and just
geeking out on the sheer alien magic of it all. Was she
corporeal? Did she become fluid once she entered the
stream? How else could she submerge herself in such
shallow water? And how had she canceled Quentin’s spell?
What was her function in the magical ecosystem? And what
about the horn? Alice was already paging through her worn
Fillory paperbacks for references to it—didn’t Martin find a
magic horn in the first book . . . ?
After a while it began to sink in that they’d been outside
for forty-five minutes in deep winter wearing nothing but
jeans and sweaters. Even Janet admitted it was time to
head back to the City. Eliot corralled the stragglers and
chatterers, and they all linked hands on the bank of the
stream.
They stood in a circle, still a little giddy, and for a moment
happy conspiratorial glances flew between them. Therewas some bad personal stuff going down, but that didn’t
have to ruin everything, did it? They were doing something
really important here. This was what every one of them had
been waiting for, looking for, their whole lives—what they
were meant to do! They’d found the magic door, the secret
path through the hidden garden. They’d gotten ahold of
something new, a real adventure, and it was only just
beginning.
It was in that hush that they heard it for the first time—a
dry, rhythmic ticking sound. It was almost lost in the
twittering of the brook, but it grew louder and more distinct.
One by one they stopped talking to listen. It was snowing
more heavily now.
Out of context it was hard to place. Alice was the first to
twig.
“It’s a clock,” she said. “That’s a clock ticking.”
She searched their faces impatiently.
“A clock,” she repeated, panicky now. “Watcherwoman,
that’s the Watcherwoman!”
Penny fumbled hastily for the button. The tick-tock grew
even louder, like a monstrous heart beating, right on top of
them, but it was impossible to tell what direction it was
coming from. And then it didn’t matter, because they were
floating up through cold, clear water to safety.
This time it was all business. Back in the City they gathered
up the cold-weather gear—all except for Janet, who lay
limply on the ground doing yoga breathing—and then got
back in the fountain, where they linked hands along the
edge with what was becoming practiced ease. Janet found
the strength to make a joke about Anita Ekberg in La Dolce
Vita . They nodded once all around and slipped back in in
unison.They were in Fillory again, set down by the stream they’d
just left, but the snow was gone. It was an early fall day now,
the air full of lukewarm mist. The temperature felt like high
sixties. It was like time-lapse photography: the branches of
trees that had been bare five minutes ago now swarmed
with turning leaves. One golden leaf floated tinily,
impossibly high in the gray sky on some fluky updraft. The
grass was littered with glassy puddles from a torrential
autumn rain that must have ended only minutes earlier.
They stood around in the mild air, hugging their bundles of
parkas and woolly gloves and feeling foolish.
“Overdressed again,” Eliot said. He dropped his bundle
in disgust. “Story of my life.”
No one could think of a reasonable alternative to just
leaving the winter gear lying there on the wet grass. They
could have gone back to the Neitherlands to store it, but
then it might have been winter all over again when they got
back. It seemed ridiculous, a bug in the system, but it didn’t
matter, they were energized now. They filled their canteens
from the stream.
A bridge spanned the creek fifty yards downstream, a
gentle arch made of intricate, curly Fillorian ironwork.
Quentin was sure it couldn’t have been there before, but
Richard insisted they just hadn’t seen it through the snow-
laden branches. Quentin looked at the flowing, burbling
water. There was no sign of the nymph. How much time had
passed since they were last here? he wondered. Seasons
in Fillory could last a century. Or had they gone back in
time? Was this the same adventure, or were they starting a
new one?
On the far side of the bridge there was a wide, neat path
through the forest, dusted with leaves and pine needles but
definitely a path in good standing this time, an official path.
They made good time, their spirits buoyed up by the perfectweather and a constant, low-level adrenaline drip. It was
really on now. No more false starts. It wasn’t that Fillory
could wipe out what happened last night—but maybe it
could, for all he knew. Anything could happen here. A brown
deer ambled out of the forest and walked ahead of them for
a stretch, looking back over its shoulder with an air of
genuinely exceptional intelligence, they all agreed, but if it
could speak it declined to address them. They tried to
follow it—maybe it was leading them somewhere? was it a
messenger from Ember and Umber?—but it bounded away
exactly the way an ordinary non-magical deer would have.
Josh practiced a spell that uncurled Anaïs’s hair from a
distance. She kept looking around, annoyed but unable to
pinpoint the source. Janet linked arms with Quentin and
Eliot and made them do a “Follow the Yellow Brick Road”
skipping dance. He couldn’t be sure, but he didn’t think
Eliot had had a drink all day. When was the last time that
had happened?
The forest seemed to go on forever. Once in a while the
sun appeared long enough to shoot some long, dusty
beams down between the trees, then disappeared again.
“This is right,” Penny said, looking around. His eyes were
glazed. He had entered a daze of ecstatic certainty. “This
feels right to me. We’re supposed to be here.”
Janet rolled her eyes.
“What do you think, Q?” Penny said. “Doesn’t this feel
right to you?”
Without knowing how it happened Quentin had Penny’s
ratty T-shirt bunched in his fists. Penny weighed more than
he’d counted on, but Quen tin still managed to get him off
balance and push him backward until his head clunked
against the damp trunk of a pine tree.
“Never speak to me,” Quentin said evenly. “Do you
understand? You do not address me directly, ever. You do
not speak to me.”“I don’t want to fight you,” Penny said. “That’s exactly what
the Watcherwoman wants—”
“Did you not just hear what I said?” Quentin clunked
Penny’s head against the tree again, hard this time.
Somebody said his name. “You lardy little fucking nub? Did
you not just fucking hear what I fucking said? Was I unclear
in any way?”
He walked away without waiting for an answer. Fillory
had better give him something to fight soon or he was
going to lose it completely.
The novelty of actually, physically being in Fillory was
wearing thin. In spite of everything a mood of general
grumpiness was growing, a spoiled-picnic mood. Every
time a bird perched overhead for more than a few seconds
Josh would say, “Okay, this is the one,” or “I think it’s trying
to tell us something,” or eventually, “Hey asshole, fly away
from me, please. Okay, thanks.”
“At least the Watcherwoman hasn’t shown up,” Eliot said.
“If that even was the Watcherwoman before,” Josh said.
“Supposedly they got her in the first book, right? So.”
“Yeah, I know.” Eliot had a handful of acorns and was
chucking them at trees as they walked. “But something’s a
little off here. I don’t understand why that nymph wasn’t
boring us about Ember and Umber. They’re always so
pushy about Them in the books.”
“If there’s a war between the rams and the
Watcherwoman still going on, we’re going to want to get
with Ember and Umber stat,” Alice said.
“Oh, yeah,” Janet said. She made quotey-fingers. “ ‘Stat.’
”
“If They want us on Their side, They will find us,” Penny
intoned. “We need have no fear on that score.”
No one answered him. It was becoming increasingly
clear that Penny’s encounter with the nymph had put him inan altered state. That was how he was dealing with Fillory.
He’d undergone a conversion experience, flipped into full-
on Renaissance Faire role-playing mode.
“Watch it, watch it! ” Richard yelled. They registered the
drumming thuds of hooves on soft earth almost too late. A
carriage drawn by two horses tore past them at a full gallop,
scattering them into the trees on either side of the road.
The carriage was closed and dark; on its side it bore what
looked like a coat of arms that had recently been painted
over in black.
The coachman was bundled up in a black cloak. He—
she? it was impossible to tell—signaled the horses to slow
to a walk, then a stop, a hundred feet ahead of them down
the road.
“The thick plottens,” Eliot said dryly.
It was about damn time something happened. Quentin,
Janet, and Anaïs walked boldly toward it, all competing to
be the reckless one, the hero, the one who pushed things
forward. In his present state of mind Quentin felt fully
prepared to go right up and knock on the shutters, but he
found himself pulling up a few yards away. So did the
others. The black coach did look ominously funereal.
A muffled voice spoke from inside the carriage.
“Do they bear the Horns?”
This was evidently directed not at them but at the
coachman, who had the better vantage point. If the
coachman replied, he/she did so inaudibly.
“Do you bear the horns?” This voice was louder and
clearer.
The advance party exchanged looks.
“What do you mean, Horns?” Janet called. “We’re not
from around here.”
This was ridiculous. It was like talking to the Once-ler inDr. Seuss.
“Do you serve the Bull?” Now the voice sounded shriller
to his ears, with high, twittering overtones.
“Who’s the bull?” Quentin said, loudly and slowly, as if he
were talking to somebody who didn’t speak English or was
mildly retarded. There was no bull in the Plover books, so
—? “We are visitors to your land . We do not serve the bull ,
or anybody else for that matter .”
“They’re not deaf, Quentin,” Janet said.
Long silence. One of the horses—they were black, too,
as was the tackle, and everything else—whickered. The
first voice said something inaudible.
“What?” Quentin took a step closer.
A trapdoor banged open on top of the carriage. The
sound was like a gunshot. A tiny expressionless head and
a long green insect torso popped up out of it—it could only
have been a praying mantis, but grown grotesquely to
human size. It was so skinny and it had so many long
emerald-colored legs and graceful whip antennae that at
first Quentin didn’t notice that it was holding a green bow
with a green arrow nocked.
“Shit!” Quentin yelped reflexively. His voice cracked. It
was close range, and there was no time to run. He cringed
violently and fell down.
The horses took off like a shot the moment the mantis
released. The trapdoor banged shut again. Dust and twigs
spun up into the air in the carriage’s wake, its four big
wheels fitting neatly in the ruts in the road.
When Quentin dared to look up again, Penny was
standing over him. He held the arrow in one hand. He must
have used a spell to speed up his reflexes, Fillorian
Circumstances be damned, then plucked it out of the air in
midflight. It would have neatly speared Quentin’s kidney.
The others came straggling up to watch the carriagerecede into the distance.
“Wait,” Josh said sarcastically. “Stop.”
“Jesus, Penny,” Janet breathed. “Nice catch.”
What, was she going to fuck him now? Quentin thought.
He stared at the arrow in Penny’s hand, panting. It was a
yard long and fletched in black and yellow like a hornet. The
tip had two angry curly steel barbs welded to it. He hadn’t
even had time to panic.
He took a shaky breath.
“That all you got?” he yelled after the dwindling carriage,
too late for it to be funny.
Slowly he got to his feet. His knees were water and
wouldn’t stop shaking.
Penny turned and, in an odd gesture, offered him the
arrow. Quentin snorted angrily and walked away, slapping
leaf junk off his hands. He didn’t want Penny to see him
trembling. It probably would have missed anyway.
“Wow,” Janet said. “That was one angry bug.”
The day wore on. Light was leaking out of the sky, and the
fun was leaking out of the afternoon. Nobody wanted to
admit they were frightened, so they took the only other
option, which was to be irritable instead. If they didn’t go
back soon, they’d have to find somewhere to make camp
for the night in the woods, which maybe wasn’t such a good
idea if they were going to get shot at by giant bugs. None of
them had enough medical magic to handle a barbed shaft
to the small intestine. They stood and argued on the dirt
road. Should they go back to Buffalo, maybe pick up some
Kevlar after all? There were only so many arrows Penny
could catch. Would Kevlar even stop an arrow?
And what kind of political situation were they walking intohere? Bugs and bulls, nymphs and witches—who were the
good guys and who were the bad guys? Everything was
much less entertaining and more difficult to organize than
they’d counted on. Quentin’s nerves were thoroughly
jangled, and he kept touching the place on his stomach
under his sweater where the arrow would have gone in.
What, was it mammals vs. insects now? But then why would
a praying mantis be fighting for a bull? The nymph had said
this wasn’t their war. Maybe she had a point.
Quentin’s feet were killing him breaking in his brand-new
hiking boots. He’d never dried off the foot he’d soaked in
the stream before, and now it felt hot and blistered and
mildewy. He imagined painful fungal spores taking root and
flourishing in the warm wetness between his toes. He
wondered how far they’d walked. It had been about thirty
hours since he’d slept.
Both Penny and Anaïs were adamantly against turning
back. What if the Chatwins had turned back? Penny said.
They were part of a story now. Had anybody actually ever
read a story? This was the hump, the hard part, the part
they’d be rewarded for later. You just had to get through it.
And not to go on, but who are the good guys here? We are
the good guys. And the good guys always survive.
“Wake up!” Alice said. “This isn’t a story! It’s just one
fucking thing after another! Somebody could have died
back there!” She obviously meant Quentin but didn’t want to
say his name.
“Maybe Helen Chatwin was right,” Richard said. “Maybe
we’re not supposed to be here.”
“You don’t get it, do you?” Janet stared them down. “It’s
supposed to be confusing at the beginning. The situation
will get explained in time. We just have to keep moving.
Keep picking up clues. If we leave now and come back it’ll
be like five hundred years from now and we’ll have to start
all over again.”
Quentin looked from one to the other of them: Alice smartand skeptical, Janet all action and thoughtless exuberance.
He turned to Anaïs to ask her how far she thought they’d
walked, on the vague theory that a European person might
have a more accurate sense of these things than a bunch of
Americans, when he realized he was the only one of the
party who wasn’t staring off into the forest to their right.
Passing them through the darkening trees, on a parallel
course, was the strangest thing Quentin had ever seen.
It was a birch tree, striding along through the forest. Its
trunk forked a meter from the ground to form two legs on
which it took stiff, deliberate steps. It was so thin that it was
hard to keep track of in the half-light, but its white bark
stood out from the dark trunks around it. Its thin upper
branches whipped and snapped against the trees it pushed
past. It looked more like a machine or a marionette than a
person. Quentin wondered how it kept its balance.
“Holy crap,” said Josh.
Without speaking they began to trail after it. The tree
didn’t hail them, but for a moment its crown of branches
twisted in their direction, as if it were glancing over a
shoulder it didn’t have. In the stillness they could actually
hear it creaking as it foraged along, like a rocking chair.
Quentin got the distinct impression it was ignoring them.
After the first five minutes of magical wonderment
passed it began to be socially awkward, blatantly following
the tree-spirit-thing like this, but it didn’t seem to want to
acknowledge them, and they weren’t about to let it go. As a
group they clung to it. Maybe this thing was going to put
them in the picture, Quentin thought. If it didn’t turn around
and beat them all to death with its branches.
Janet kept a close eye on Penny and shushed him
whenever he looked like he might be about to say
something.
“Let it make the first move,” she whispered.
“Freak show,” Josh said. “What is that thing?”“It’s a dryad, idiot.”
“I thought those were girl-trees.”
“They’re supposed to be sexy girl-trees,” Josh said
plaintively.
“And I thought dryads were oaks,” Alice said. “That’s a
birch.”
“What makes you think it’s not a girl-tree?”
“Whatever it is,” Josh said under his breath, “it’s pay dirt.
Fuckin’ tree-thing, man. Pay fuckin’ dirt.”
The tree was a fast walker, almost bouncing along on its
springy, knee-less legs, to the point where soon they would
have to break into a half jog to keep up with it. Just when it
looked like they were either going to lose their only
promising lead so far or segue into an undignified chase
scene, it became obvious where it was heading anyway.HUMBLEDRUM
Ten minutes later Quentin was sitting in a booth in a dimly lit
bar with a pint of beer on the table in front of him, as yet
untasted. Though unexpected, this felt like a good
development for him. Bar, booth, beer. This was a situation
where he knew how to handle himself, whatever world he
was in. If he’d been training for anything since he left
Brakebills, it was this.
Identical pints stood in front of the others. It was late
afternoon, five thirty or so, Quentin guessed, though how
could you know? Were there even twenty-four hours in a
day here? Why would there be? Despite Penny’s
insistence that the tree had been “leading” them here, it
was pretty clear they would have found the inn on their own.
It was a dark, low-roofed log cabin with a sign outside
featuring two crescent moons; a delicate little clockwork
mechanism caused the two moons to revolve around each
other when the wind blew. The cabin was backed up
against, and appeared almost to emerge from, a low hillock
that humped up out of the forest floor.
Cautiously pushing inside, through swinging doors, they
discovered what could have passed for a period room in a
museum of Colonial America: a long narrow chamber with
a bar against one wall. It reminded Quentin of the Historick
Olde Innes he’d wandered through when he was visiting his
parents in Chesterton.
Only one other booth was occupied, by a family(?)—a
tall, white-haired old man; a high-cheekboned woman who
might have been in her thirties; and a serious little girl.
Obviously locals. They sat perfectly silent and erect, staring
balefully at the empty cups and saucers in front of them. The
little girl’s hooded eyes expressed a precocious
acquaintance with adversity.
The walking birch tree had disappeared, presumably intoa back room. The bartender wore a curious old-fashioned
uniform, black with many brass buttons, something like
what an Edwardian policeman might have worn. He had a
narrow, bored face and heavy black five o’clock shadow,
and he slowly polished pint glasses with a white cloth in the
manner of bartenders since time immemorial. Otherwise
the room was empty, except for a large brown bear wearing
a waistcoat sitting slumped in a sturdy armchair in one
corner. It wasn’t clear whether the bear was conscious or
not.
Richard had brought along several dozen small gold
cylinders in the hope that they would work as a kind of
universal interdimensional currency. The bartender
accepted one without comment, weighed it expertly in his
palm, and returned a handful of change: four dented,
wobbly coins stamped with an assortment of faces and
animals. Two of them bore mottos in two different
unreadable scripts; the third was a well-worn Mexican peso
from the year 1936; the fourth turned out to be a plastic
marker from a board game called Sorry. He set about filling
pewter tankards.
Josh stared into his dubiously and took a fastidious sniff.
He was as fidgety as a third-grader.
“Just drink it!” Quentin hissed irritably. God, people were
such losers sometimes. He lifted his own tankard.
“Cheers.”
He swished the liquid around in his mouth. It was bitter
and carbonated and alcoholic and definitely beer. It filled
him with confidence and a renewed sense of purpose. He’d
had a scare, but it’s funny how it—and the beer—were now
focusing his mind wonderfully. Quentin shared his booth
with Richard, Josh, and Anaïs—he had successfully
avoided sitting next to either Alice or Janet, or Penny—and
they exchanged multiple transverse glances over their
foamy pints. They were a long way from where they’d
started out that morning.
“I don’t think that bear is stuffed!” Josh whisperedexcitedly. “I think that’s a real bear!”
“Let’s buy it a beer,” Quentin said.
“I think it’s asleep. And anyway it doesn’t look that
friendly.”
“Beer might help with that,” Quentin said. He felt punchy.
“This could be the next clue. If it’s a talking beer, I mean a
talking bear, we could, you know, talk to it.”
“About what?”
Quentin shrugged and took another sip.
“Just get a feel for what’s going on around here. I mean,
what else are we doing here?”
Richard and Anaïs hadn’t touched their drinks. Quentin
took another big gulp just to spite them.
“We’re playing it safe, is what we’re doing,” Richard said.
“This is strictly reconnaissance. We’re avoiding any
unnecessary contact.”
“You’re kidding me. We’re in Fillory, and you don’t want
to talk to anybody?”
“Absolutely not.” Richard sounded shocked, shocked, at
the very idea. “We’ve made contact with another plane of
existence. What, that’s not enough for you?”
“As a matter of fact, it’s not. A giant praying mantis tried
to kill me earlier today, and I’d like to know why.”
Fillory had yet to give Quentin the surcease from
unhappiness he was counting on, and he was damned if he
was leaving before he got what he wanted. Relief was out
there, he knew it, he just needed to get deeper in, and he
wasn’t about to let Richard slow him down. He had to jump
the tracks, get out of his Earth-story, which wasn’t going so
well, and into the Fillory-story, where the upside was
infinitely higher. Anyway, the mood he was in, Quentin was
willing to take any position on any subject with anybody if it
meant he could pick a fight.“Barkeep!” Quentin said, louder than necessary. As an
afterthought he gave himself a thick Wild West drawl. If it
feels right, go with it. He jerked his thumb at the bear. “
’Nother round fer mah friend the bar there in the corner.”
A bar in a bar. Clever. In the other booth Eliot, Alice,
Janet, and Penny all turned around in unison to look at him.
The man in the uniform just nodded wearily.
The bear, it emerged, drank only peach schnapps, which it
sipped from delicate thimble-size glasses. Given its bulk,
Quentin guessed it could consume a more or less unlimited
amount of it. After two or three it ambled over on all fours
and joined them, dragging over the heavy armchair, the only
piece of furniture in the room capable of supporting its
weight, by hooking its claws into the chair’s much-abused
upholstery and pulling. It looked way too big to be moving
around in a confined space.
The bear was named Humbledrum, and it was, as its
name suggested, a very modest bear. It was a brown bear,
it explained in deep sub-subwoofer tones, a species larger
than the black bear but much much smaller than the mighty
grizzly bear, though the grizzly was in fact a variety of brown
bear. It was not, Humbledrum reiterated periodically, half
the bear that some of those grizzlies were.
“But it’s not just about who’s the biggest bear,” Quentin
offered. They were bonding. He wasn’t sure exactly what he
wanted from the bear, but this seemed like a good way to
get it. He was drinking Richard’s beer, having finished his
own. “There’s other ways to be a good bear.”
Humbledrum’s head bobbed enthusiastically.
“Oh yes. Oh yes. I am a good bear. I never meant to say
that I’m a bad bear. I’m a good bear. I respect territories.
I’m a respectful bear.” Humbledrum’s terrifyingly huge paw
fell on the table emphatically, and it put its black muzzle veryclose to Quentin’s nose. “I am a very. Respectful. Bear.”
The others were conspicuously silent, or talked among
themselves, elaborately play-acting that they were unaware
of the fact that Quentin was conversing with a drunk magic
bear. Richard had bailed out early, swapping places with
the always-game Janet. Josh and Anaïs huddled together,
looking trapped. If Humbledrum noticed any of this, it didn’t
seem to bother it.
Quentin understood that he was operating outside most
of the group’s comfort level. He could see out of the corner
of his eye that Eliot was trying to shoot him warning glances
from the other table, but he avoided them. He didn’t care.
He had to push things forward; he was afraid of staying still.
This was his play, and he was playing it, and he was going
to play it his way till it was played out. Everybody else could
either get on board or button their candy asses on back to
Drop City.
It wasn’t like what he was doing was easy. The range of
Humbledrum’s interests was suffocatingly narrow, and its
depth of knowledge in those areas abysmally profound.
Quentin still vaguely remembered being a goose, how
laser-focused he’d been on air currents and freshwater
greenery, and he realized now that all animals were
probably, at heart, insufferable bores. As a hibernating
mammal Humbledrum had far more than the layman’s
familiarity with cave geology. When it came to honey, it was
the subtlest and most sophisticated of gastronomes.
Quentin learned quickly to steer the conversation away from
chestnuts.
“So,” Quentin said, flatly interrupting a disquisition on the
stinging habits of the docile Carniolan honeybee ( Apis
mellifera carnica ) as contrasted with those of the slightly
more excitable German honeybee ( Apis mellifera
mellifera , aka the German black bee). “Just to be clear, this
is Fillory we’re in, right?”
The lecture ground to a halt. Under its fur Humbledrum’smassive brow furrowed, producing a vivid equivalent of
human befuddlement.
“What is, Quentin?”
“This place we’re in, right now,” Quentin said. “It’s called
Fillory.”
A long moment passed. Humbledrum’s ears twitched. It
had impossibly cute, round, furry teddy-bear ears.
“Fillory,” it said slowly, cautiously. “That is a word I have
heard.” The giant bear sounded like a kid at the blackboard
hedging his bets against what might or might not be a trick
question.
“And this is it? We’re in Fillory?”
“I think it . . . may once have been.”
“So what do you call it now?” Quentin coaxed.
“No. No. Wait.” Humbledrum held up a paw for silence,
and Quentin felt a tiny pang of pity. The enormous hairy
idiot really was trying to think. “Yes, it is. This is Fillory. Or
Loria? Is this Loria?”
“It has to be Fillory,” Penny said, leaning over from the
other booth. “Loria is the evil country. Across the eastern
mountains. It’s not like there’s no difference. How can you
not know where you live?”
The bear was still shaking its heavy muzzle.
“I think Fillory is somewhere else,” it said.
“But this definitely isn’t Loria,” Penny said.
“Look, who’s the talking bear here?” Quentin snapped.
“Is it you? Are you the talking fucking bear? All right. So
shut the fuck up.”
Outside the bar the sun had set, and a few other
creatures trailed in. Three beavers sipped from a common
dish at a round café table in the company of a fat, green,
oddly alert-looking cricket. In one corner, by itself, a whitegoat lapped at what looked like pale yellow wine in a
shallow bowl. A slender, shy-looking man with horns jutting
through his blond hair sat at the bar. He wore round
glasses, and the lower half of his body was covered in thick
bushy hair. The whole scene had a dreamlike quality, like a
Chagall painting come to life. In passing, Quentin noted
how disturbing it was to see a man with goat’s legs. Those
backward-bending knees reminded him of the crippled or
the gravely deformed.
As the inn filled up the silent family rose as one and
shuffled out of their booth, their expressions still somber.
Where could they be going? Quentin wondered. He’d seen
no sign of a village nearby. It was getting late, and he
wondered if they had a long walk ahead of them. He
pictured them trudging down the grooved dirt road in the
moonlight, the little girl riding on the old man’s narrow
shoulders and then later, when she was too tired even for
that, drooling drowsily on his lapel. He felt chastened by
their gravity. They made him feel like a bumptious tourist,
rattling drunkenly around what was, he kept forgetting, their
country, a real country with real people in it, not a storybook
at all. Or was it? Should he run after them? What secrets
were they taking with them? When she reached to open the
door, Quentin saw that the woman with the elegant
cheekbones had lost her right arm below the elbow.
After another round of schnapps and scintillating
persiflage with Humbledrum, the little silver birch sapling
emerged from wherever it had been concealing itself and
threaded its way through the room toward them, padding on
feet of matted roots which still had clods of dirt clinging to
them.
“I am Farvel,” it said chirpily.
It looked even stranger in the full light of the bar. It was a
literal stick figure. There were talking trees in the Fillory
books, but Plover was never very precise in describing
their appearance. Farvel spoke through what looked like a
lateral cut in its bark, the kind of wedge that a single hatchetblow might have left. The remainder of its features were
sketched out by a spray of thin branches covered in
fluttering green leaves, which roughly limned the outlines of
two eyes and a nose. He looked like a Green Man carving
in a church, except that his flat little mouth gave him a
comically sour expression.
“Please pardon my rudeness earlier, I was disconcerted.
It is so rare to meet travelers from other lands.” It had
brought a stool from the bar, and now it bent itself into a
rough sitting position. It looked a little like a chair itself.
“What brings you here, human boy?”
At last. Here we go. The next level.
“Oh, I don’t know,” Quentin began, casually throwing an
arm over the back of the booth. Obviously, he was
emerging as the designated point person, the team’s
natural first-contact specialist. The bartender joined them
as well, having been replaced at his station by a solemn,
dignified chimp with a hangdog face. “Curiosity mostly, I
guess. We found this button? That let us travel between
worlds? And we were all sort of at loose ends on Earth
anyway, so we just . . . came over here. See what we could
see, that kind of a thing.”
Even half drunk, that sounded a lot lamer than he’d
hoped. Even Janet was looking at him with concern. God,
he hoped Alice wasn’t listening. He smiled weakly, trying to
play it cool. He wished he hadn’t had quite so much beer on
quite such an empty, weary stomach.
“Of course, of course,” Farvel said companionably. “And
what have you seen so far?”
The bartender watched Quentin steadily. He sat back-to-
front on a cane chair, his arms resting on the seat back.
“Well, we ran into a river nymph who gave us a horn. A
magic horn, I think. And then this bug—this insect, in a
carriage, I guess it was a praying mantis—it shot an arrow
at me, that almost hit me.”He knew he should probably be playing this closer to the
vest, but which part should he be leaving out exactly? How
did those calculations work? The rigors of keeping pace
with Humbledrum had left him a shade less than razor-
keen. But Farvel didn’t seem put off, he just nodded
sympathetically. The chimp came out from behind the bar to
place a lighted candle on their table, along with another
round of pints, this time on the house.
Penny leaned over the back of the booth again.
“You guys don’t work for the Watcherwoman, do you? Or I
mean, like, secretly? Not like you want to, but you have to?”
“Jesus, Penny.” Josh shook his head. “Smooth.”
“Oh my, oh dear,” Farvel said. A charged glance passed
between him and the bartender. “Well, I suppose you could
say . . . but no, one shouldn’t say. Oh dear, oh dear.”
Its composure thoroughly disrupted, the little treelet, the
picture of arboreal distress, let its branches droop a little,
and its green birch leaves fluttered anxiously.
“I like a touch of lavender in my honey,” Humbledrum
observed, apropos of nothing. “You want the bees to nest
near a good-size field of it. Downwind, if you can manage
it. That’s the real trick of it. In a nutshell.”
Farvel wrapped one slender twig-hand around its glass
and tipped some beer into its mouth. After a visible
struggle with itself, the tree-spirit began again.
“Young human,” Farvel said. “What you suppose is true,
in a sense. We do not love her, but we fear her. Everybody
does, who knows what’s good for them.
“She has not yet succeeded in slowing the advance of
time, not yet.” It glanced at the humid green twilight forest
visible through the open doorway, as if to reassure itself
that it was still there. “But she hungers to. We see her
sometimes, from far away. She moves through the forest.
She lives in the treetops. She has lost her wand, they say,but she will find it again soon, or fashion a new one.
“And then what? Can you imagine it, that eternal sunset?
All will be confused. With no boundaries to separate them,
the day animals and the night creatures will go to war with
each other. The forest will die. The red sun will bleed out
over the land until it is as white as the moon.”
“But I thought the Witch was dead,” Alice said. “I thought
the Chatwins killed her.”
So she was listening. How could she sound so calm?
Another glance passed between Farvel and the bartender.
“Well, that’s as may be. It was long ago, and we are far
from the capital here. But the rams have not shown
themselves here for many a year, and here in the country
living and dead are not such simple things. Especially when
witches come into it. And she has been seen!”
“The Watcherwoman has.” Quentin was trying to follow.
This was it, they were getting into it, the sap was starting to
flow.
“Oh yes! Humbledrum saw her. Slender she was, and
veiled.”
“We heard her!” Penny said, getting into the spirit of it.
“We heard a clock ticking in the woods!”
The bear just stared into his glass of schnapps with
small, watery eyes.
“So the Watcherwoman,” Penny said eagerly. “Is this a
problem we can, you know, help you with?”
All of a sudden Quentin felt supremely tired. The alcohol
in his system, which had thus far been acting as a stimulant,
without warning flipped to a chemical isomorph of itself and
became a sedative instead. Where before he’d been
burning it like rocket fuel, now it was gumming up the
works. It was dragging him down. His brain began to shut
down nonessential operations. Somewhere in his core the
self-destruct countdown had begun.He sat back in the booth and allowed his eyes to glaze
over. This was the moment that should have galvanized him
into action, the moment that all those years at Brakebills
had been leading up to, but instead he was letting go,
sinking down into dysphoria. Whatever, if Penny wanted to
take this over, let it be his show from now on. He had Alice,
why shouldn’t he have Fillory, too? The time for clever
thinking had passed anyway. The tree was clearly taking
their bait, or they were taking its bait, or both. Either way,
here it was, the adventure had arrived.
There was a time when this had been his most
passionate hope, when it would have ravished him with
happiness. It was just so weird, he thought sadly. Why now,
when it was actually happening, did the seductions of Fillory
feel so crude and unwanted? Its groping hands so clumsy?
He thought he’d left this feeling behind long ago in
Brooklyn, or at least at Brakebills. How could it have
followed him here, of all places? How far did he have to
run? If Fillory failed him he would have nothing left! A wave
of frustration and panic surged through him. He had to get
rid of it, break the pattern! Or maybe this was different,
maybe there really was something off here. Maybe the
hollowness was in Fillory, not in him?
He slid warily out of the booth, rubbing up against
Humbledrum’s huge scratchy thigh on his way out, and
visited the restroom, a malodorous pit-style affair. He
thought for a second that he might be sick into it, and that
maybe that wouldn’t be the worst idea in the world, but
nothing happened.
When he got back, Penny had taken his seat. He took
Penny’s place in the other booth and rested his chin in his
hands and his hands on the table. If only they had drugs.
Getting high in Fillory, that would really be the ultimate. Eliot
had moved to the bar and appeared to be chatting up the
horned man.
“What this land needs,” Farvel was saying, leaning into
the table conspiratorially and inviting the others to dolikewise, “is kings and queens. The thrones in Castle
Whitespire have been empty for too long, and they can only
be filled by the sons and daughters of Earth. By your kind.
But”—he cautioned them, stirringly—“only the stout of heart
could hope to win those seats, you understand. Only the
stoutest of heart.”
Farvel looked on the verge of squeezing out a viscous,
sappy tear. Jesus, what a speech. Quentin could practically
have recited his lines for him.
Humbledrum farted mournfully, three distinct notes.
“So what would this involve, exactly?” Josh asked, in a
tone of studied skepticism. “Winning, as you say, those
seats?”
What it involved, Farvel explained, was a visit to a
perilous ruin called Ember’s Tomb. Somewhere within the
tomb was a crown, a silver crown that had once been worn
by the noble King Martin, centuries ago, when the Chatwins
reigned. If they could recover the crown and bring it to
Castle Whitespire, then they could occupy the thrones
themselves—or four of them could anyway—and become
kings and queens of Fillory and end the threat of the
Watcherwoman forever. But it wouldn’t be easy.
“So do we absolutely need this crown?” Eliot asked.
“Otherwise what? It won’t work?”
“You must wear the crown. There is no other way. But you
will have help. There will be guides for you.”
“Ember’s Tomb?” Quentin roused himself for a final
effort. “Waitamin nit. Does that mean Ember’s dead? And
what about Umber?”
“Oh, no-no-no!” Farvel said hastily. “It is just a name. A
traditional name, it means nothing. It has just been so long
since Ember was seen in these parts.”
“Ember is the eagle?” Humbledrum rumbled.
“The ram.” The uniformed bartender corrected him,speaking for the first time. “One of them. Widewings was
the eagle. He was a false king.”
“How can you not know who Ember is?” Penny asked the
bear disgustedly.
“Oh dear,” the tree said, hanging its vernal, garlanded
face sadly down toward the table. “Do not judge the bear
too harshly. You must understand, we are very far from the
capital here, and many have ruled these green hills, or tried,
since the last time you children of Earth walked them. The
silver years of the Chatwins are long ago now, and the
years since have been forged from baser metals. You
cannot imagine the chaos we have suffered through. There
was Widewings the Eagle, and after him the Wrought Iron
Man, the Lily Witch, the Spear-Carrier, the Saint Anselm.
There was the Lost Lamb, and the vicious depredations of
the Very Tallest Tree.
“And you know,” he finished, “we are so very far from the
capital here. And it is very confusing. I am only a birch, you
know, and not a very large one.”
A leaf fluttered to the table, a single green tear.
“I have a question,” Janet said, unintimidated as ever. “If
this crown is so damn important, and Ember and Umber
and Amber or whatever are so powerful, why don’t they just
go get it themselves?”
“Ah, well, there’s Laws,” Farvel sighed. “They can’t, you
see. There’s Higher Laws that even such as They are
bound by. It must be you who retrieve the crown. It can only
be you.”
“We have lived too long,” the bartender said glumly, to no
one. He’d been putting away his own wares with
impressive efficiency.
Quentin supposed it all made sense. Ember and Umber
absent, a power vacuum, an insurgent Watcherwoman
emerging from whatever witchy quasi-death she’d suffered
at the Chatwins’ hands. Penny had been right after all:they’d gotten a quest. Their role was clear. It had a pat,
theme-park quality to it, like they were on some fantasy-
camp role-playing vacation, but it did make sense. He
could still hope. But let’s be sure.
“I don’t want to sound crass,” he said out loud. “But
Ember and Umber are the big shots around here, right? I
mean, of all those people, things, whatever you mentioned,
They’re the most powerful? And morally righteous or
whatever? Let’s be clear on this for a second. I want to be
sure we’re backing the right horse. Or ram. Whatever.”
“Of course! It would be folly to think otherwise!”
Farvel shushed him, looking worriedly over at the table of
beavers, who didn’t seem to be paying them any attention,
but you couldn’t be too careful. Bizarrely, Farvel produced a
cigarette from somewhere and lit it from the candle on the
table, careful not to ignite any part of itself. It protruded
jauntily from the tree’s little cleft mouth. The thing must have
a death wish. Aromatic smoke rose up through the leafy
corona of its face.
“Only do not judge us too harshly. The rams have been
absent for many years. We have had to carry on without
them. Make our own way. The forest must live.”
Eliot and the horned man had vanished, presumably
together. Incorrigible, that man; it cheered Quentin up by a
scintilla that somebody at least was having a good time.
The white goat slurped its yellow wine loudly in its corner.
Humbledrum just gazed sorrowfully into its schnapps.
Quentin reminded himself, as if he had almost forgotten the
fact, that he was very far from home, in a room full of
animals drinking alcohol.
“We have lived too long,” the bartender announced
again, sullenly. “The great days are past.”They stayed at the inn that night. The rooms were carved
hobbit-style into the hill behind the main cabin. They were
comfortable, windowless, and silent, and Quentin slept like
the dead.
In the morning they sat at a long table in the bar, eating
fresh eggs and toast and drinking cold water out of stone
jugs, their backpacks piled up in a heap in one of the
booths. Apparently Richard’s gold cylinders went a long
way in the Fillorian economy. Quentin felt clear-eyed and
miraculously un-hungover. His restored faculties
appreciated with a cold new keenness the many painful
aspects of his recent personal history, but they also allowed
him to really appreciate almost for the first time the reality of
his physical presence in actual Fillory. It was all so detailed
and vivid compared to his car toonish fantasies. The room
had the seedy, humiliated look of a bar seen in direct
sunlight, sticky and thoroughly initialed by knife- and claw-
wielding patrons. The floor was paved with old round
millstones lightly covered with a scattering of straw, the
chinks between them filled in with packed dirt. Neither
Farvel nor Humbledrum nor the bartender were anywhere in
sight. They were served by a brusque but otherwise
attentive dwarf.
Also in the dining room were a man and a woman who
sat opposite each other by a window, sipping coffee and
saying nothing and glancing over at the Brakebills table
every once in a while. Quentin had the distinct impression
that they were just killing time, waiting for him and the
others to finish their breakfast. That proved to be the case.
When the table was cleared, the pair introduced
themselves as Dint—the man—and Fen. Both were fortyish
and weather-beaten, as if they spent a lot of time outdoors
in a professional capacity. They were, Dint explained, the
guides. They would take the party to Ember’s Tomb, in
search of King Martin’s crown. Dint was tall and skinny, with
a big nose and huge black eyebrows that together took up
most of his face; he was dressed all in black and wore a
long cape, apparently as an expression of the extremeseriousness with which he regarded himself and his
abilities. Fen was shorter and denser and more muscular,
with close-cropped blond hair. With a whistle around her
neck she could have been a gym teacher at a private
school for girls. Her clothes were loose-fitting and practical,
evidently designed for ease of movement in unpredictable
situations. She projected both toughness and kindness,
and she wore high boots with fascinatingly complex laces.
She was, to the best of Quentin’s ability to gauge these
things, a lesbian.
Cool autumn sunlight slotted through the narrow windows
cut in the heavy log walls of the Two Moons. Sober, Quentin
felt more eager than ever to get on with it. He looked hard
at his beautiful, despoiled Alice—his anger at her was a
hard nugget he didn’t know if he could ever digest, a kidney
stone. Maybe when they were kings and queens. Maybe
then he could have Penny executed. A palace coup, and
definitely not a bloodless one.
Penny proposed that they all swear an oath together, to
celebrate their shared high purpose, but it seemed like
overkill, and anyway he couldn’t muster a quorum. They
were all shrugging into their packs when Richard abruptly
announced that they could go if they wanted, but he would
be staying behind at the inn.
No one knew how to react. Janet tried to joke him out of
it, then when that didn’t work she pleaded with him.
“But we’ve come this far together!” she said, furious and
trying not to show it. Of all of them she hated this kind of
disloyalty to the group the most. Any crack in their collective
facade was an attack on her personally. “We can always
turn back if things get sketchy! Or in an emergency we can
use the button as a rip cord! I think you’re way
overreacting.”
“Well, and I think you’re underreacting,” Richard said.
“And I think you can count on the authorities to overreact
when they find out about how far you’re taking this.”“If they find out about it,” Anaïs put in. “Which they will
not.”
“ When they find out about it,” Janet said hotly, “this is
going to be the discovery of the century, and we are going
to make history, and you’re missing out on it. And if you
can’t see that, I frankly have no idea why you came along in
the first place.”
“I came along to keep you people from doing anything
stupid. Which is what I’m trying to do right now.”
“Whatever.” She put a hand in his face, then walked
away, her own face crumpling. “Nobody cares if you come
or not. There are only four thrones anyway.”
Quentin half expected Alice to join Richard—she looked
like she was hanging on to her nerve by the very tips of her
fingers. He wondered why she hadn’t bolted already; she
was way too sensible for a random lark like this. Quentin
felt the opposite way. The danger would be going back, or
staying still. The only way out was through. The past was
ruins, but the present was still in play. They would have to
tie him down to keep him from going to Ember’s Tomb.
Richard would not be dislodged, so in the end they set off
in a loose pack without him, with Dint and Fen walking
ahead. They followed yesterday’s carriage path for only a
short while before striking out at an angle into the woods.
For all the glory of their high and noble purpose, it felt like
they were going on a summer-camp nature hike, or a junior
high field trip, with the kids goofing off and the two
counselors looking dour and superior and grown-up and
glaring them back into line when they strayed too far. For
the first time since they came to Fillory everybody was
relaxing and being themselves instead of playing intrepid
explorer-heroes. Low stone walls traversed the forest floor,
and they took turns balancing along them. Nobody knew
who had built them, or why. Josh said something about
where was the damn Cozy Horse when you needed it.
Before long they emerged from the forest into a maze ofsunlit meadows, and then into open farmland.
It would not have been hard to get Alice alone. But
whenever Quentin rehearsed what he wanted to say,
however well it began, he got to a point where he had to
ask her what happened with Penny, and then the dream
sequence just went white, like a film of a nuclear blast.
Instead, he made conversation with the guides.
Neither of them was very talkative. Dint did show a flicker
of interest when he learned that the visitors were
magicians, too, but they turned out not to have much in
common. His entire expertise was in battle magic. He was
barely aware that there were other kinds.
Quentin had the impression he was loath to give away
any trade secrets. But he did open up about one thing.
“I sewed this myself,” he said, a little shyly, pulling his
cape to one side to show Quentin a bandolier-like vest
underneath with many small pockets on it in rows. “I keep
herbs in here, powders, whatever I might need in the field. If
I’m casting something with a material component I can just .
. . like this”—he executed a series of rapid pinching-and-
dispensing motions that he’d obviously spent a lot of time
practicing—“and I’m ready to go!”
Then the dour facade descended again, and he went
back to his silent brooding. He carried a wand, which
almost nobody at Brakebills did. It was considered slightly
embarrassing, like training wheels, or a marital aid.
Fen was more overtly friendly but at the same time
harder to read. She wasn’t a magician, and she carried no
obvious weapons, but it was understood that of the two of
them she was the muscle. As far as Quentin could make
out she was some kind of martial artist—she called the
discipline she practiced inc aga, an untranslatable phrase
from a language Quentin had never heard of. She kept to a
strict regimen: she couldn’t wear armor or touch silver or
gold, and she ate practically nothing. What inc aga looked
like in practice was impossible for Quentin to fathom—shewould talk about it only in high-flown, abstract metaphors.
She and Dint were both adventurers by profession.
“There aren’t many of us now,” Fen said, her short sturdy
legs somehow devouring distance faster than Quentin’s
long skinny ones. She never looked at him as she talked,
her bulgy eyes continuously searching the horizon for
potential threats. “Humans, I mean. Fillory is a wild place,
and getting wilder. The forest is spreading, getting deeper
and darker. Every summer we cut down the trees, burn
them down sometimes, and then mark the borders of the
woods. The next summer the borders are buried a hundred
yards deep. The trees eat the farms, and the farmers come
to live in the towns. But where will we live when all of Fillory
is forest? When I was a girl, the Two Moons was in open
country.
“The animals don’t care,” she added bitterly. “They like it
this way.”
She lapsed into silence. Quentin thought it might be a
good time to change the subject. He felt like a green-as-
grass PFC from Dubuque, Iowa, trading banter with the
hardened South Vietnamese regular attached to his unit.
“So, I don’t mean to sound crass,” he said, “but are we
paying you for this? Or is somebody?”
“If we succeed, that will be payment enough.”
“But why would you want somebody from our world to be
king anyway? Who you don’t even know? Why not
somebody from Fillory?”
“Only your kind can sit the thrones of Castle Whitespire.
It’s the Law. Always has been.”
“But that makes no sense. And this is speaking as the
beneficiary of the Law here.”
Fen grimaced. Her protuberant eyes and full lips gave
her face a fishy cast.“Our people have been slaughtering and betraying one
another for centuries, Quentin,” she said. “How can you be
any worse? The rule of the Chatwins is the last peaceful
time anyone can remember. You don’t know anyone here;
you have no history, no scores to settle. You belong to no
faction.” She stared fixedly at the road ahead of them,
biting off her words. The bitterness in her tone was
bottomless. “It makes perfect political sense. We have
reached the point where ignorance and neglect are the
best we can hope for in a ruler.”
They hiked through slow-rolling hills for the rest of the
day, their thumbs hooked in the straps of their backpacks,
sometimes along chalk roads, sometimes cutting across
fields, crickets jumping up out of the long grass to get out of
their way. The air was cool and clean.
It was an easy hike, a beginner’s hike. There was
singing. Eliot pointed out a ridge that he said was
“positively screaming” to have pinot grapes planted on it. At
no point did they see a town or another traveler. The rare
tree or fence post they passed cast a crisp shadow on the
ground, straight and clear, like it was etched there. It made
Quentin wonder how Fillory really worked. There was hardly
any central government, so what would a king actually do?
The entire political economy appeared to be frozen in the
feudal Middle Ages, but there were elements of Victorian-
level technology as well. Who had made that beautiful
Victorian carriage? What craftsmen wove the innards of the
clockwork mechanisms that were so ubiquitous in Fillory?
Or were those things done by magic? Either way, they must
keep Fillory in its pre-industrial, agrarian state on purpose,
by choice. Like the Amish.
At noon they witnessed one of Fillory’s famous daily
eclipses, and they observed something that was described
in none of the books: instead of being a sphere, the moon
of Fillory was formed in the shape of an actual, literal
crescent, an elegant silvery arc that sailed through the sky,
rotating slowly around its empty center of gravity.They made camp at sunset in a ragged square scrap of
meadow. Ember’s Tomb, Dint told them, was in the next
valley over, and they wouldn’t want to spend the night any
closer to it. He and Fen divided the watches between them;
Penny volunteered to take one, but they declined. They ate
some roast-beef sandwiches they’d been saving since the
house upstate and unrolled sleeping bags and slept in the
open, their bodies pressing flat the tough, coarse green
grass underneath.E MBE R’S TOMB
The hill was smooth and green. Set into its base was a
simple post-and-lintel doorway: two enormous rough stone
slabs standing upright with a third slab laid across them. In
the space between them was darkness. It reminded
Quentin of a subway entrance.
It was just dawn, and the door was on the western face of
the hill, so the hill’s shadow fell over them. The grass was
frosted with pale dew. There was no sound at all. The
shape of the hill was a pure emerald-green sine wave
against the lightening sky. Whatever was going to happen
was going to happen here.
They stopped and huddled a hundred yards away,
miserable and unshow ered, to pull themselves together.
The morning was chilly. Quentin rubbed his hands together
and tried a warmth spell that only left him feeling feverish
and slightly queasy. He couldn’t seem to get oriented to
Fillory’s Circumstances. He had slept heavily the night
before, with vivid dreams, the weight of his fatigue sinking
him down into dark, primal realms haunted by roaring winds
and tiny furry beasts, early mammals hiding fearfully in the
long grass. He wished he could just stand here a little
longer and look at the pink light on the dew. Everybody had
a heavy hunting knife, which back on Earth had seemed
beyond overkill but now felt pathetically inadequate.
The shape of the hill tugged at something in his deep
memory. He thought of the hill they’d seen in that enchanted
mirror, in that musty little storeroom back at Brakebills,
where he and Alice and Penny had studied together, so
long ago. It looked like the same hill. But so did a thousand
hills. It was just a hill.
“So just to be clear,” Eliot was saying to Dint and Fen.
“It’s called Ember’s Tomb, but Ember isn’t buried here. And
he’s not dead.”He sounded exactly as relaxed and unworried as he ever
had back at Brakebills. Just dotting the i ’s, clearing up the
details, the way he would have insouciantly picked apart
one of Bigby’s problem sets, or decoded a closely written
wine label. He was in control. The deeper they rolled into
Fillory, the shakier Quentin felt, but Eliot was the opposite:
he just got calmer and more sure of himself, exactly the way
Quentin had thought that he, Quentin, would, and exactly the
way that he wasn’t.
“Every age finds a use for this place,” Fen was saying. “A
mine, a fortress, a treasure house, a prison, a tomb. Some
dug it deeper. Others walled up the parts they didn’t need
or wished to forget. It is one of the Deep Ruins.”
“So you’ve been here before?” Anaïs asked. “I mean, in
there?”
Fen shook her head. “Not this one. A hundred places like
it.”
“Except that the crown is in this one. And how did it get
there exactly?”
Quentin had wondered that same thing. If the crown really
had belonged to Martin, maybe that was where he went
when he disappeared. Maybe he died down there.
“The crown is there,” Dint snapped. “We will go in and
get it. Enough questions.”
He swirled his cape impatiently.
Alice was standing very near Quentin. She looked small
and still and cold.
“Quentin, I don’t want to go in there,” she said softly,
without looking at him.
Over the past week Quentin had devoted literally hours to
fantasizing about what he would say to Alice if she ever
spoke to him again. But all his carefully planned speeches
fell away at the sound of her voice. She wasn’t going to get
a speech. It was so much easier to be angry. Being angrymade him feel strong, even though—and this contradiction
did nothing to diminish his anger—he was angry only
because his position was so weak.
“So go home,” was all he said.
That wasn’t right either. But it was too late, because
somebody was running toward them.
The weird thing was that the entrance to the tomb was still a
hundred yards off, and Quentin could see the creatures
coming the whole way, two of them, running flat out across
the wet grass for at least a minute, like they were out doing
early-morning wind sprints. It was almost funny. They
weren’t human, and they didn’t seem to belong to the same
species as each other either, but they were both cute. One
was something like a giant hare, squat and covered in
gray-brown fur, maybe four feet tall and about that wide. It
hopped toward them determinedly, its long ears flattened
back. The other one was more like a ferret—or maybe a
meerkat? A weasel? Quentin tried to think what the closest
equivalent furry animal would be. Whatever it was it ran
upright and it was tall, seven feet at least, most of it long
silky torso. Its face was chinless, with prominent front teeth.
This odd couple came charging at them across the green
grass silently, no battle cry, no sound track, in the still early-
morning air. At first it looked like they might be running to
greet them, but Bunny had short, stubby swords in both its
front paws, held out steady in front of him as he ran, and
Ferret was hefting a quarterstaff.
They closed to within fifty yards. The Brakebills crowd
shrank back involuntarily, as if the newcomers exerted an
invisible force field. This was it: they had come to the end of
what was conceivable. Something was about to give. It had
to. Dint and Fen didn’t move. Quentin realized there wasn’t
going to be any parley or rock-paper-scissors. This was
going to be about stabbing. He had thought he was ready,
but he wasn’t. Somebody had to stop it. The girls werehanging on to each other as if in a howling wind, even Alice
and Janet.
Oh my God, Quentin thought, this is really happening.
This is really happening.
Ferret arrived first. It stutter-stepped to a jittery stop,
breathing hard. Its huge eyes blinked as it smoothly spun its
staff two-handed in a figure-eight pattern. It whickered in the
still air.
“Hup!” yelled Fen.
“Ha!” Dint answered.
They set themselves side by side, as if they were getting
ready to lift something heavy. Then Dint stepped back,
ceding first blood.
“Jesus,” Quentin heard himself say. “Jesus jesus jesus.”
He wasn’t ready for this. This wasn’t magic. This was the
opposite of magic. The world was ripping open.
Ferret feinted once and snapped a nasty jab at Fen’s
face. The two ends of the quarterstaff were now glowing an
ominous enchanted orange, like the tip of a cigarette.
Somebody shrieked in the silence.
Even as one end of the staff whipped forward, Fen turned
away from it, bowing forward at the waist, ducking the jab
and turning seamlessly, almost lazily, into a graceful
spinning roundhouse kick. She seemed to be moving
slowly, but her foot clocked Ferret’s weak chin hard enough
to spin its head around a quarter turn.
Ferret grinned, with blood in its big teeth, but it had more
bad news coming. Fen was still spinning, and her next kick
connected low and hard with the side of its knee. The knee
bent in, sideways, wrongly. Ferret staggered and aimed the
same jab at Fen’s face, whereupon Fen caught the flashing
quarterstaff barehanded—the smack of it hitting her open
palm was like a rifle shot. She dropped her slick martial
arts elegance and tussled savagely, messily for control.For a second they froze, vibrating with isometric strain
while Ferret, with agonizing, comical slowness, stretched
its neck forward to try to bite Fen’s bare throat with its big
rodent incisors. But she had it outmuscled. Fen slowly
forced the staff up under its chin, right into where its
Adam’s apple would be, while her right foot stamped
pneumatically on the outside of its hurt knee, over and over
again. It gagged and twisted away.
Just as Quentin thought he couldn’t watch anymore,
Ferret made its last mistake. It took its paw off the
quarterstaff for an instant—it looked like it was going for a
knife strapped to its thigh. With the extra leverage Fen flung
it down hard on the turf, and the wind huffed out of it.
“Ha!” she barked, and stamped twice on its thickly furred
throat, hard. A long, gargling rattle followed, the first sound
Quentin had heard it make.
Fen popped up, visibly amped, her face red under her
blond buzz cut. She picked up the quarterstaff, braced
herself, and broke it over her knee in one try. Throwing the
broken pieces aside, she leaned down and screamed in
Ferret’s face.
“Haaaaaaaaaa!”
The broken ends of the staff spat out a few feeble burnt-
orange sparks on the grass. Sixty seconds had passed,
maybe not even that.
“Jesus jesus jesus,” Quentin said, hugging himself.
Someone was throwing up on the grass. It had never once
even occurred to him to try to help. He wasn’t ready for this.
This wasn’t what he’d come here for.
Meanwhile the other assassin, the squat muscular Bunny,
had never arrived on the scene. Dint had done something
to the ground beneath its long rabbit feet, or maybe to its
sense of balance, so that it couldn’t seem to stand up. It
was scrabbling around helplessly on the grass like it was
wet ice. Fen, on a roll, stepped over Ferret’s body towardhim, but Dint stopped her.
He turned back to the Brakebills crowd.
“Can any of you take him from here? Bow and arrow
maybe?” Quentin couldn’t tell if he was pissed that they
weren’t helping or if he was just being polite, offering them
a taste of the action. “Anybody?”
Nobody answered. They stared at him like he was
speaking gibberish. Every time the muscle-bound hare
tried to get up its paws kept flying out from under it.
Chittering and weeping, the hare shouted a guttural cry and
threw one of its swords at them, but it slipped again and the
sword landed safely short and off to one side.
Dint waited for an answer from the group, then turned
away disgustedly. He made a quiet tapping gesture with his
wand, like he was ashing a cigar, and a bone in the hare’s
upper thigh snapped audibly. It screamed in falsetto.
“Wait!” It was Anaïs, pushing her way forward, past a
waxwork Janet. “Wait. Let me try.”
The fact that Anaïs could even walk and talk right now
was incomprehensible to Quentin. She began a spell but
stuttered a few times, rattled, and had to start over. Dint
waited, obviously impatient. On her third try she completed
a sleep spell that Penny had taught them. Bunny’s grunting
struggles ceased. It sagged onto its side on the grass,
looking alarmingly sweet. Ferret was still gagging weakly,
eyes open and staring at the sky, red foam pouring from its
mouth, but nobody paid any attention to it. No part of it
below its neck was moving.
Anaïs went over and picked up the short sword the hare
had thrown.
“There,” she said to Dint proudly. “Now we kill it, no
problem!”
She hefted the sword happily in one hand.As a teenager in Brooklyn Quentin had often imagined
himself engaging in martial heroics, but after this he knew,
as a cold and immutable fact, that he would do anything
necessary, sacrificing whatever or whomever he had to, to
avoid risking exposure to physical violence. He wasn’t even
ashamed. Shame never came into it. He embraced his new
identity as a coward. He would run in the other direction. He
would lie down and cry and put his arms over his head or
play dead. It didn’t matter what he had to do, he would do it
and be glad.
They trailed after Dint and Fen—and what kind of
retarded names were those anyway, Dint and Fen? he
thought numbly—through the doorway and into the hill. He
barely noticed his surroundings. A square stone corridor
opened out into a huge open chamber that looked almost
as big as the hill that contained it, which must have been
mostly hollow. Green-tinted light filtered down through a
circular oculus at the room’s apex. The air was full of stone
dust. The ruins of an enormous brass orrery stood in the
center of the room, its skinny arms stripped of its planets. It
looked like a broken, defoliated Christmas tree, the
smashed spheres lying at its base like fallen ornaments.
Nobody noticed a large—ten-feet-long large—green
lizard standing frozen amid the remains of shattered tables
and benches until it abruptly unfroze and skittered off into
the shadows, claws skritching on the stone floor. The horror
was almost pleasant: it wiped away Alice and Janet and
everything else except itself, like a harsh, abrasive
cleanser.
They wandered from room to empty room, down echoing
stone hallways. The floor plan was beyond chaotic. The
stonework changed styles and patterns every twenty
minutes as a new generation of masons took over. They
took turns putting light spells on their knives, their hands,
various inappropriate body parts in an effort to break the
tension.Having tasted blood, Anaïs now tagged after Dint and
Fen like an eager puppy, lapping up whatever observations
she could get out of them about personal combat.
“They never had a chance,” Fen said, with professional
disinterest. “Even if Dint hadn’t taken the second one, even
if I had been alone, the quarterstaff is not a collaborative
weapon. It simply takes up too much room. Once the tall
one is into a form, those tips are flying left and right, up and
down. He can’t afford to worry about his friend. You face
them one-on-one, and you move on.
“They should have fallen back, waited for us together in
that big chamber. Taken us by surprise.”
Anaïs nodded, obviously fascinated.
“Why didn’t they?” she asked. “Why did they come
running straight at us?”
“I don’t know.” Fen frowned. “Could’ve been an honor
thing. Could’ve been a bluff, they thought we’d run. Could
be they were under a spell, they couldn’t help it.”
“Did we have to kill them?” Quentin burst out. “Couldn’t
we have just, I don’t know—”
“What?” Anaïs turned on him, sneering. “Maybe we could
have taken them prisoner? We could have rehabilitated
them?”
“I don’t know!” he said helplessly. This wasn’t how it was
supposed to work. “Tied them up? Look, I guess I just
wasn’t that clear on what it would actually be like. Killing
people.”
It made him think of the day the Beast appeared—that
same bottomless feeling, all bets off, like the cable had
snapped and they were in free fall.
“Those are not people,” Anaïs said. “Those were not
people. And they tried to kill us first.”
“We were breaking into their home.”“Glory has its price,” Penny said. “Did you not know that,
before you sought it?”
“Well, I guess they paid the price for us, huh?”
To Quentin’s surprise Eliot rounded on him, too.
“What, you’re going to back out? You?” Eliot laughed a
bitter, barking laugh. “You need this almost as badly as I
do.”
“I’m not backing out! I’m just saying!”
Quentin had time to wonder why exactly Eliot did need
this before Anaïs cut them off.
“Oh, God. Please, can we not?” She shook her curly
head in disgust. “Can we all just not?”
Four hours and three flights of stairs and one mile of empty
corridor later Quentin was examining a door when it
opened suddenly, hard, smacking him in the face. He took
a step backward and put a hand to his upper lip. In his half-
stunned state he was more preoccupied with whether or not
his nose was bleeding than with who or what had just
slammed the door into it. He raised the back of his hand to
his upper lip, checked it, raised it again, then checked it
again. Yep, definitely bleeding.
An elfin being stuck its narrow, angry face around the
edge of the door and glared at him. Purely by reflex Quentin
kicked it shut.
He’d been about to point out the door to the others, who
were busy surveying a wide, low-ceilinged room with a dry
basin in the center. A creeping ivy-like plant had grown out
of the basin and halfway up the walls and then died.
Daylight was a months-ago memory. There were twinkly
lights going off behind Quentin’s eyes, and his nose felt like
a warm, melting gob of something salty and throbbing. With
melodramatic slowness the door creaked open again,gradually revealing a slight, pointy-featured man wearing
black leather armor. He didn’t look particularly surprised to
see Quen tin. The man, elf, whatever, whipped a rapier out
of his belt and snapped into a formal fencing stance.
Quentin backed away, gritting his teeth with fear and
resignation. Just like that, Fillory had vomited out another
one of its malignant menagerie.
Maybe fatigue had dulled the edge of his fear, but almost
unbeknownst to himself Quentin was enunciating the words
to Penny’s Magic Missile spell. He’d practiced it back in
New York, and now he backpedaled as he cast it because
the Black Elf—as Quentin tagged him—was advancing on
him using a poncey sideways fencing shuffle, his free hand
held aloft, wrist limp. Quentin was getting the spell right, he
could feel it, and he was loving himself for getting it right.
Terror and physical pain sharpened and simplified
Quentin’s moral universe. He snapped the magical darts
straight into the elf ’s chest.
The Black Elf coughed and sat down hard, looking
dismayed. His face was the perfect height for kung-fu
kicking, so Quentin, in what felt like an act of consummate
bravery, kicked him savagely in the face. The rapier
clattered to one side.
“Haaaaaaa!” Quentin shouted. It was like when he’d
fought Penny, when the fear had left him. Was this battle
rage at last? Was he going to become a berserker like
Fen? It felt so good to stop being afraid.
Nobody else in the room had noticed what was going on,
not until he yelled. Now the scene tilted and slid into
nightmare. Four more Black Elves scrambled through the
open door carrying an assortment of weapons, followed by
two goat-legged men and two terrifying flying giant
bumblebees the size of basketballs. Also present was
something fleshy and headless that scrambled along on
four legs, and a silent, wispy figure composed of white mist.
With the two teams arranged on their respective sides ofthe room, a staring match ensued. It all reminded Quentin
powerfully of the opening moments of a game of dodgeball.
His body seethed. He wanted to cast the missile spell
again. He’d gone from feeling frail and vulnerable and
cowardly to feeling badass and supercharged and armor-
plated. The two merce naries were whispering and
pointing, choosing up targets.
Fen picked up a pebble and tossed it lightly, sidearm, at
one of the fauns (they had evil fauns now?), who let it
bounce off a round leather buckler strapped to his forearm.
He looked pissed.
“The grimling’s the problem,” Quentin heard Fen say to
Dint.
“Yeah. Leave the pangborn, though, I have something for
that.”
Dint withdrew a wand from his cape and appeared to
write something in the air with it. He said a couple of words
into the tip, like it was a microphone, then he indicated one
of the fauns with it, a conductor cuing a soloist. The faun
burst into flame.
It was like it was made of magnesium soaked in gasoline
and had just been waiting for an errant spark to set it off. No
part of it was not on fire. It took a step backward, then
turned to the goat-man next to it as if to say something.
Then it fell down, and Quentin couldn’t look at it anymore.
As all hell broke loose he tried to hang on to the gleeful
bloodlust he’d felt so clearly a moment ago, to fan it back
into life, but he’d lost it, fumbled it in the confusion.
Fen was thriving. This was evidently what she trained for.
Quentin had missed it before, but she was actually mixing
in a little magic as she fought—her inc aga was a hybrid
technique, a martial art fully integrated with some highly
specialized spellcasting style. Her lips moved, and there
were white flashes where her fist- and hand-strikes landed.
Meanwhile Dint addressed himself to the ghostly, misty
figure, saying something inaudible that caused it to struggleand then be dispersed by an invisible, soundless roaring
gale.
Quentin took a quick inventory of his brave company.
Eliot had made himself useful by casting a kinetic spell on
the second satyr, pinning it safely to the ceiling. Anaïs had
her short sword out—it had a moonlight shimmer to it now,
which meant she’d put a sharpness charm on it—and was
looking eagerly around for somebody to stick it into. Janet
was hugging herself against the back wall, her face wet and
shining with tears. Her eyes were blank. She was gone.
Too many things were happening at once. Quentin’s
stomach clenched when he realized an elf had singled
Alice out and was advancing across the dry basin toward
her, twirling a long straight knife—were they called
poniards?—in each hand. It was obvious from Alice’s face
that every spell she’d ever learned had just now slipped her
mind. She turned away, dropped to one knee, and locked
her hands behind her head. Nobody in the history of all the
conflicts in the world had ever looked more defenseless.
He only had time to feel all the tenderness he had ever
felt for her surge up in one infinitely concentrated instant—
and to be surprised that it was all still there, moist and intact
beneath the unsightly scorched layer of his anger—before
the back of Alice’s blouse tore wide open and a small
leathery biped clawed its way vigorously out of the skin of
her back. It was a party trick, a showgirl bursting out of a
cake. Alice had loosed her cacodemon.
No question, the cacodemon was instantly the happiest
being in the room. This was exactly the party it wanted to be
at. Facing the elf, it bounced on its toes like a wiry little
tennis pro preparing for return of service, with triple match
point on its side. Its leap was evidently several beats faster
than its opponent had counted on. In a moment it was past
the poniards and had fastened its wiry grip on the elf ’s
upper arms and buried its horrible face in the soft hollow of
the elf ’s throat. The elf gagged and sawed futilely at the
demon’s shark-skinned back with its knives. Quentinreminded himself for at least the hundredth time never to
underestimate Alice again.
And just like that it was over. They were out of opponents.
The elves and the bees were down. The room was full of
acid smoke from the burned satyr. Fen owned most of the
body count; she was already running through a post-combat
warm-down ritual, stepping backward through the forms
she’d executed in the brief battle and whispering their
names to herself. Penny was carefully casting a sleep spell
on the satyr that Eliot had stuck to the ceiling, while Anaïs
watched, impatient to administer the coup de grace.
Quentin noted, with the pettiest possible annoyance, that
they had the satyr without the buckler, which meant that Dint
had burned the satyr with the buckler, which meant that he
couldn’t loot the buckler for himself. He had a crusty dried
mustache from his bloody nose.
That wasn’t so bad, he told himself. This wasn’t such a
nightmare. He risked a shuddering sigh of relief. Was that
really it? Had they gotten everything?
Janet had finally thawed from her frozen state and was
busy with something. Unlike everything else they’d seen,
the fleshy, headless four-legged creature was neither
humanoid nor obviously related to any terrestrial fauna. It
was radially symmetrical, like a starfish, with no obvious
front or back or face. It stood unreadable in a dark corner,
taking sudden scary little hops in unexpected directions. It
had a large faceted gem embedded in its back.
Decoration? Or was that its eye? Its brain?
“Hey.” Fen snapped her fingers in Janet’s direction.
“Hey!” Evidently she’d forgotten Janet’s name. “Leave that.
Leave the grimling to us.”
Janet ignored her. She continued to take wary steps
toward it. Quentin wished she wouldn’t. She was in no kind
of emotional state to be working magic.
“Janet!” he shouted.“Shit,” Dint said distinctly.
It was a businesslike “shit”—another damn mess for him
to clean up. He brought his wand back out from wherever
he’d stashed it.
But before he could act Janet reached carefully behind
her back and brought out something small but heavy.
Gripping it with both hands, she made a small adjustment
and then fired five shots into the creature at close range.
The pistol bounced upward with each shot, and each time
she carefully re-aimed it. The sound was shattering in the
low-ceilinged chamber. One shot struck sparks off the jewel
in the grimling’s back. It sank to the floor, shivering and
deflating like a parade balloon, still expressionless. It made
a high urgent whistling sound. By the fifth shot it was visibly
dead.
Nothing and nobody in the room moved. Janet turned
around. The tears she had shed earlier were already dry.
She glared at them.
“What the fuck are you looking at?” she said.
It got colder the deeper they went. At six stories
underground Quentin was shivering in his heavy sweater
and thinking nostalgically about the warm puffy parkas
they’d abandoned way back by the sunny little stream. They
broke for a rest in a circular room with a beautiful lapis
lazuli spiral inlaid in the floor. Dark green ambient light
emanated from somewhere, like the light in an aquarium.
Dint sat in the lotus position, wrapped his cape around him,
and meditated. A gap of about six inches separated him
from the floor. Fen did calisthenics. The break was clearly
not for their benefit; they were like professional
mountaineers impatiently shepherding a herd of rich fat
cats up the slopes of Mount Everest. The Brakebills party
was a package they were contractually obligated to deliver.Alice sat by herself on a stone bench, her back against a
pillar, looking blankly at a mosaic on the wall depicting a
sea monster, a creature like an octopus but much larger
and with many more than eight legs. Quentin straddled the
bench at the other end, facing her. Her eyes flicked over to
his for a long moment. There was not a hint of either
contrition or forgiveness in them. He made sure his eyes
looked the same.
They watched the mosaic. The little squares that made
up the sea creature were moving very slowly, rearranging
themselves on the wall. The crude blue waves rolled along
very gradually. It was easy decorative magic. There was a
bathroom floor at Brakebills that had much the same effect.
Alice felt like a black hole that was trying to pull him in, rip
the flesh clean off him with its sheer toxic gravity.
Finally she took out her canteen and used it to wet a
spare white sock.
“Let’s do something about your nose,” she said.
She reached out to dab at his face, but at the last minute
he realized he didn’t want her to touch him. He took the
sock himself, carefully. It turned pink as he wiped at his
upper lip.
“So what was it like,” Quentin said. “When you let the
demon out.”
Now that the high of combat was gone, and she was no
longer in danger, his anger came creeping back. The
anesthetic was wearing off. It was an effort not to say
anything vicious. She hiked her foot up onto the bench and
started undoing the laces on her sneakers.
“It felt good,” she said carefully. “I thought it would hurt, but
it was kind of a relief. Like sneezing. I never felt like I could
really breathe with that thing inside me.”
“Interesting. Did it feel as good as fucking Penny?”
He’d actually thought he was going to be civil, but it wastoo hard. The words came out of his mouth of their own
malevolent volition. He wondered what else he would say.
I’ve got all kinds of demons inside of me, he thought. Not
just the one.
If he’d managed to hurt Alice, she didn’t let it show. She
carefully peeled off a sock. A nasty white blister covered
the entire ball of her foot. They watched the mosaic some
more. A little boat had floated into the scene, a lifeboat
maybe, or a launch from a whaler. It was crowded with tiny
people. It looked pretty much like a done deal that the sea
creature was going to crush the little boat in its many long
green arms.
“That was—” She stopped and started over. “That wasn’t
good.”
“So why did you do it.”
Alice tilted her head, thoughtfully, but her face was white.
“To get back at you. Because I was feeling like shit about
myself. Because I didn’t think you would care. Because I
was drunk, and he came on pretty strong—”
“So he raped you.”
“No, Quentin, he did not—”
“Never mind. Stop talking.”
“I don’t think I understood how much it would hurt you—”
“Just stop talking, I can’t talk to you anymore, I can’t hear
anything you’re saying!”
He’d started that little speech speaking normally and he
ended it shouting. In a way fighting like this was just like
using magic. You said the words, and they altered the
universe. By merely speaking you could create damage
and pain, cause tears to fall, drive people away, make
yourself feel better, make your life worse. Quentin leaned
forward, all the way forward, until he had placed his
forehead on the cool marble of the bench in front of him. Hiseyes were closed. He wondered what time it was. His head
felt a little spinny. He could fall asleep right there, he
thought. Just like this. He wanted to tell Alice he didn’t love
her, but he couldn’t, because it wasn’t true. It was the one
lie he couldn’t quite tell.
“I wish this were over,” Alice quietly.
“What.”
“This mission, this adventure, whatever you want to call it.
I want to go home.”
“I don’t.”
“This is bad, Quentin. Somebody’s going to get hurt.”
“Good, I hope they do. If I die doing this, at least I’ll have
done something. Maybe you’ll do something one of these
days instead of being such a pathetic little mouse all the
time.”
She said something he didn’t catch.
“What?”
“I said, don’t talk to me about death. You don’t know
anything about it.”
For no reason, and against his express conscious
wishes, some very tight elastic band of muscle around
Quentin’s chest relaxed very slightly. Something between a
laugh and a cough escaped him.
He sank back against his pillar.
“God, I am literally losing my fucking mind.”
Across the room Anaïs sat with Dint, talking intently and
going over a handmade map of their progress so far that
he’d sketched on what looked suspiciously like graph
paper. Anaïs seemed more like a part of the guides’ gang
than the Brakebills gang now. As he watched she bent over
the map, deliberately smooshing her tit into Dint’s shoulder
as she did so. Josh was nowhere to be seen. Penny andEliot were dozing on the floor in the center of the room, their
heads resting on their packs. Eliot had hectored Janet
about the gun until he extracted a promise from her to
dispose of it responsibly.
“Do you even want this anymore, Quentin?” Alice asked.
“I mean, what we’re doing here? This kings and queens
idea?”
“Of course I do.” He’d almost forgotten why they were
here. But it was true. A throne was exactly what he needed
right now. Once they were ensconced in Castle Whitespire,
wreathed in glory and every possible physical comfort, then
maybe he could find the strength to come to grips with all
this. “You’d have to be an idiot not to.”
“You know the funny thing though?” She sat up straight,
suddenly animated. “I mean the really hilarious thing? You
actually don’t. You don’t even want it. Even if this whole
thing came off without a hitch, you wouldn’t be happy. You
gave up on Brooklyn and on Brakebills, and I fully expect
you to give up on Fillory when the time comes. It makes
things very simple for you, doesn’t it? Well, and of course
you were always going to give up on us.
“We had problems, but we could have fixed them. But
that was too easy for you. It might actually have worked, and
then where would you be? You would have been stuck with
me forever.”
“Problems? We had problems?” People looked up. He
dropped his voice to a furious whisper. “You fucked fucking
Penny! I’d say that’s a fucking problem!”
Alice ignored this. If he didn’t know better, he would have
said that the tone of her voice almost resembled
tenderness.
“I will stop being a mouse, Quentin. I will take some
chances. If you will, for just one second, look at your life and
see how perfect it is. Stop looking for the next secret door
that is going to lead you to your real life. Stop waiting. Thisis it: there’s nothing else. It’s here, and you’d better decide
to enjoy it or you’re going to be miserable wherever you go,
for the rest of your life, forever.”
“You can’t just decide to be happy.”
“No, you can’t. But you can sure as hell decide to be
miserable. Is that what you want? Do you want to be the
asshole who went to Fillory and was miserable there? Even
in Fillory? Because that’s who you are right now.”
There was something true about what Alice was saying.
But he couldn’t grasp it. It was too complex, or too simple.
Too something. He thought of that first week he’d spent at
Brakebills, when he and Eliot had gone sculling, and they’d
watched the other rowers hunching and shivering in what to
Quentin was a warm summer day. That was what he looked
like to Alice. It was strange: he’d thought that doing magic
was the hardest thing he would ever do, but the rest of it
was so much harder. It turned out that magic was the easy
part.
“Why did you come here, Alice?” he said. “If you don’t
even want this?”
She looked at him evenly.
“Why do you think, Quentin? I came because of you. I
came here because I wanted to take care of you.”
Quentin looked around at the others. He saw Janet sitting
with her back against one wall with her eyes closed, though
Quentin didn’t get the sense that she was asleep. The
revolver was cradled in her lap. She wore a red T-shirt with
a white star on it and khaki pants. She must be cold, he
thought. As he watched she sighed and licked her lips
without opening her eyes, like a little girl.
He didn’t want to be cold. Alice was still watching him.
Behind her the mosaic was a swirl of green tentacles and
whitecaps and floating fragments. He slid down the stone
bench to her end and kissed her and bit her lower lip until
she gasped.After a certain point it was no longer possible to ignore the
fact that they were lost. The hallways wound fiendishly and
branched frequently. They were in a maze, and they were
not solving it. Dint had become obsessive about his map,
which now stretched to half a dozen sheets of graph paper
that he shuffled and scribbled on intently whenever they
turned a corner. At Brakebills they’d learned a spell that
would leave glowing footprints behind them, but Dint
thought it would just lead predators straight to them. The
walls were carved with ranks of crude marching figures in
profile, thousands of them, each one holding a different
totem: a palm leaf, a torch, a key, a sword, a pomegranate.
It was darker here. They kept piling on light spells to
anything that would take one, but the glow just didn’t seem
to go as far. They fast-walked down the corridor, double-
time now. The mood was that of a picnic threatened by
lightning. The corridor branched and branched again and
intermittently dead-ended, forcing them to backtrack.
Quentin’s feet hurt in his brand-new hiking boots; a stray
spur of something hard stabbed him in the same spot on
his left ankle every time he took a step.
He risked a glance back the way they’d come. There was
a red glow back there—something somewhere in the maze
was throwing off a deep crimson light. He felt a deep-
seated lack of interest in finding out what it was.
Ten minutes later they got hung up at a fork in the
passageway, Dint vigorously supporting the right fork, Josh
making the case, admittedly largely on intangibles, that the
other fork looked “ way more promising” and just “feels more
like what we want.” The walls were painted with oddly
convincing trompe-l’oeil landscapes now, crowded with tiny
dancing figures. Doors slammed open and shut in the
distance.The hallway was brightening behind them. They all saw it
now. It was like a subterranean sun was rising. Discipline
was getting ragged. They broke into a half run, and it was
too dark for Quentin to be absolutely sure that nobody
lagged behind. He focused on Alice. She was panting. The
back of her blouse gaped palely open where the demon
had torn its way out; he could see her black bra strap, which
had somehow survived the operation. He wished he had a
jacket to give her.
He caught up with Dint.
“We should slow down,” Quentin panted. “We’re going to
lose somebody.”
Dint shook his head. “They’re tracking us now. If we stop,
they’ll mob us.”
“What the fuck, man! Didn’t you plan for this?”
“This is the plan, Earth child,” Dint snarled back. “You
don’t like it, go home. We need kings and queens in Fillory.
Is that not a thing worth dying for?”
Not really, Quentin thought. Asshole. That slutty nymph
was right. This is not your war.
They bulled through a door into a tapestry that was
apparently concealing it from the other side. Behind the
tapestry was a candle-lit banquet hall set with food, fresh
and steaming. They were alone; it was as if the waiters who
placed the dishes there had just moments earlier
scampered out of sight. The table stretched out in both
directions with no end points. The tapestries were rich and
detailed, the silverware gleaming, the crystal goblets full of
wine, deep gold and arterial purple.
They stopped and stared in both directions, blinking. It
was like they had stumbled into the dream of a starving
man.
“Nobody eats!” Dint called. “Don’t touch it! Nobody eats,
nobody drinks!”“There are too many entrances,” Anaïs said, her pretty
green eyes flicking in all directions. “They can attack us.”
She was right. A door opened farther down the hall,
admitting two large, rangy individuals of the monkey family,
though Quentin couldn’t have said exactly what to call them.
Their glazed simian eyes looked bored. In perfect
synchrony they dipped their hands into pouches slung over
their shoulders and came up with golf-size lead balls. With
a practiced windup of their overdeveloped shoulders and
overlong arms, they whipped the balls at the group at big-
league fastball speeds.
Quentin grabbed Alice’s hand, and they cowered back
behind a heavy tapestry, which caught one of the balls. The
other one clipped a candlestick on the table and then
spectacularly vaporized four wineglasses in a row. Under
other circumstances, Quentin thought, that would actually
have been cool. Eliot touched his forehead, where he’d
been hit by a shard of glass. His fingers came away bloody.
“Would somebody please kill those things, please!”
Janet said disgustedly. She was crouched under the table.
“Seriously,” Josh complained through clenched teeth.
“This shit isn’t even mythological. We need some unicorns
or something up in this piece.”
“Janet!” Eliot said. “Do your demon!”
“I already did!” she yelled back. “I did it the night after
graduation! I felt sorry for it!”
Huddling behind the rough fabric of the tapestry, Quentin
watched a pair of legs stroll by, unhurriedly. While the rest
of them hunkered down, Penny strode confidently toward
the two ball throwers as they wound up again, no
expressions on their stiff monkey faces. He was gesturing
fast with both hands and singing an incantation in a high,
clear tenor. Calm and serious in the shifting candlelight,
wearing just a T-shirt and jeans, he looked much less like a
puffy wannabe than he used to. He looked like a hardenedyoung battle-mage. Was that how he’d looked to Alice,
Quentin wondered, the night she slept with him?
With one hand Penny stopped a lead ball in midair, then
a second. They hovered there unsupported for a moment
like surprised humming-birds before they recovered their
weight and dropped to the floor. With the other hand Penny
lobbed back a fiery seed that grew and expanded like an
unfurling parachute. The tapestries on either side of the hall
blazed where the fireball brushed them. It engulfed the two
monkeys, and when it dissipated they were simply gone,
and a ten-foot section of the banquet table was a roaring
bonfire.
“Yeah!” Penny yelled, momentarily forgetting his Fillory-
speak. “Boom, bitches!”
“Amateur,” Dint muttered.
“If my hairline is messed up,” Eliot said weakly, “I will
bring those things back to life and kill them all over again.”
They retreated along the banquet hall in the opposite
direction, awkwardly shuffling past the straight-backed
wooden chairs. The hall was just too narrow—with the table
in the center there wasn’t enough room for them to form up
properly. The setup had a zany Scooby Doo feeling. Quen
tin took a running step and half leaped, half slid across the
banquet table, clearing dishes as he went, feeling like an
action hero sliding across the firebird-emblazoned hood of
his muscle car.
A curious Alice in Wonderland menagerie was crowding
into the hall from either side. As military order broke down
in the room so did taxonomical order. Species and body
parts were mashed up seemingly at random. Had
everything collapsed after the Chatwins left, to the point
where humans and animals interbred? There were ferrets
and rabbits, giant mice and loping monkeys and a vicious-
looking fisher, but there were also men and women with the
heads of animals: an astute-looking fox-headed man who
appeared to be preparing a spell; a woman with a thick-necked lizard head with huge independent eyes; an oddly
dignified pike-bearer upon whose shoulders swayed the
sinuous neck and tiny head of a pink flamingo.
Fen plucked a sharp knife off the banquet table, gripped
the blade carefully between her thumb and forefinger, and
threw it spinning so that it took the fox-man point-first in the
eye socket.
“Move,” she barked. “Everybody. Fall back. Don’t let
them bog us down. We have to be close now.”
They fell back along the length of the banquet hall. The
basic idea was to try to keep a coherent line of scrimmage
between them and their attackers, but the line kept getting
disrupted. One of their party would get hung up—the chairs
kept getting in the way—or the tomb dwellers would group
together and make a charge, or worse, one of them would
blunder in from the side through a hidden door straight into
the center of their party. He and Alice managed to hold
hands for the first ten seconds, but after that it just wasn’t
possible. This wasn’t like the earlier fights. The whole thing
kept degenerating into the running of the bulls. The hall
seemed to go on forever; possibly it did. The candles and
mirrors and food gave the whole scene an incongruously
festive air. Even if they decided to take the button home, at
this point it would be hard to muster everybody in one place
to actually do it.
Quentin jogged along with his knife out, though he didn’t
know if he was capable of using it. He felt like he had in
gym class, trying to look like part of the team while at the
same time desperately hoping nobody would pass him the
ball. A giant house cat popped out from behind a tapestry
right in front of him, and Fen almost certainly saved
Quentin’s life by cannoning fearlessly into the thing so that
they rolled together on the floor, grappling and thrashing,
until she knocked it out with a furious inc aga head-butt.
Quentin gave her a hand up and they ran on.
Dint was putting on a show. He’d hopped spryly up ontothe banquet table and was striding along it, rapping out
percussive syllables with astonishing speed and fluency,
his wand tucked back behind his ear. His long black hair
crackled, and crazy energies flashed out from the tips of his
long fingers; sometimes he actually had two different spells
going simultaneously, Quentin noticed, a primary attack in
one hand and a second, lesser piece of witchery
simmering in his off hand. At one point he made his arms
swell up hugely, picked up two chairs in each giant hand
and clubbed down a half dozen opponents with them in
three businesslike swings—left, right, left.
Penny managed to persuade a section of the table to
rear up like an angry centipede and attack the Fillorians
until they chopped it to pieces. Even Quentin got off a
couple of sweaty-palmed Magic Missiles into the press.
Fen’s tunic was soaked with sweat. She closed her eyes
and placed her palms together, whispering, and when she
parted them they gleamed with a terrible white
phosphorescence. The next foe she met—a sinewy
scimitar wielder who was either wearing a leopard skin or
was half leopard from the waist up—she shouted and
punched her fist through its chest up to her shoulder.
But the close calls were getting closer. The situation was
disintegrating, and they needed an exit strategy. The
corridor was filling with bodies and smoke. Quentin’s
breath whistled through his teeth, and in his head he was
singing a psychotic nonsense song.
Somewhere along the line Quentin left his knife in a furry
Fillorian stomach. He never saw the creature’s face—it was
a creature, not a person, not a person, not a person—but
later he would remember the sensation of jamming it in,
how the blade punched through the tough rubbery muscles
of the diaphragm and then slid easily into the underlying
viscera, and how the muscles gripped the blade after it was
in. He snatched his hand away from the hilt like it was
electrified.
Quentin registered first Josh, then Eliot, hunching theirshoulders and letting loose their cacodemons. Eliot’s was
particularly awesome-looking, banded from head to foot in
horizontal yellow and black danger stripes. It slid sideways
across the smooth table, scrabbling like a flung cat, then
charged into the fray with unself-conscious glee, clinging
and tearing and leaping and clinging again.
“Goddamn it!” Janet was screaming. “What else? What
the fuck else?”
“This is bullshit,” Eliot yelled hoarsely. “Side door! Pick a
side door and go through it!”
There was a moment of premonitory silence, as if some
of the creatures actually sensed what was going to happen
next. Then the floor jolted, and a giant man made of glowing
red-hot iron shouldered his way sideways through the wall.
He took the whole wall down with him. A flying brick
nicked Fen’s head, and she dropped like she’d been shot.
Waves of heat poured off the giant, warping the air around
him, and anything he touched burned. He stood bent over,
hands on the floor—he was about a third again too tall for
the confined space of the banquet hall. His eyes were
molten gold, with no pupils. Dust filled the air. The giant put
his foot on Fen’s prostrate body, and she burst into flames.
Everybody ran. Anybody who fell was trampled. The heat
coming off the man’s smooth red skin was unbearable.
Quentin would have done anything to put distance between
it and himself. There were pileups at the nearest exits;
Quentin pushed past them and farther down the hall. He
looked around for Alice and couldn’t even find anybody
human until he risked a look back and saw Josh standing in
the middle of the hallway, all alone.
He seemed to be undergoing one of his freakish power
surges. He’d summoned another of his miniature black
holes, the way he’d done that day on the welters pitch. It
had nearly swallowed a tree that day; now as Quentin
watched an entire length of tapestry wavered toward it and
then flowed into it all at once, ripping free of its curtain rodwith a sound like a fusillade of pistol shots. The light in the
hall dimmed and became amber. The red giant was
momentarily stalled by this. He was squatting down,
studying the apparition, apparently fascinated by it. He was
bald, and his expression was blank. His huge, hairless,
glowing-red cock and balls swung loose between his thighs
like the clapper of a bell.
Then Quentin was alone and running along a cool, dark
side corridor. It was silent—the noise switched off like a
TV. He was sprinting flat out, and then he was running, then
jogging, and then, after a while, he was just walking. It was
over. He couldn’t run anymore. The air scorched his lungs.
He bent over and put his hands on his knees. His back
itched painfully, behind his right shoulder, and when he
reached back to scratch he found an arrow dangling from
the hump of muscle there. Unthinkingly, he pulled it out, and
a freshet of blood trickled down his back, but there wasn’t
much pain. It had only gone in an inch, probably not even
that far. He was almost glad it hurt. The pain was something
to hang on to. He held the wooden shaft, grateful to have
something solid in his hands. The silence was amazing.
He was safe again. For a few minutes he allowed himself
to luxuriate in the simple joys of breathing cool air, of not
running, of being alone in the semidarkness and not in
immediate danger of dying. But the gravity of the situation
kept seeping through, messily, until he could no longer blot
it up. He could be the last one alive for all he knew. He had
no idea how to get back up to the surface. He could die
down here. He felt the weight of the dirt and rock over his
head. He was buried alive. Even if he made it out, he didn’t
have the button. He had no way to get back to Earth.
Footsteps in the darkness. Somebody was coming,
walking. The figure’s hands were glowing with a light
charm. Wearily, Quentin started in on yet another Magic
Missile spell, but before he could finish he realized it was
just Eliot. He let his hands drop and sagged to the floor.
Neither of them spoke, they just leaned together againstthe wall, side by side. The cold stone soothed the little divot
of pain the arrow had punched in Quentin’s back. Eliot’s
shirt was untucked. His face was all smudged with soot on
one side. He would have been furious if he’d known.
“You all right?”
Eliot nodded.
“Fen’s dead,” Quentin said.
Eliot took a deep breath and ran his glowing hands
through his thick wavy hair.
“I know. I saw.”
“I don’t think there’s anything we could have done,” Eliot
said. “Big Red back there was just out of our league, that’s
all.”
They fell silent. It was like the words had spun off into
some void where they had no meaning. They’d lost any
connection with the world; or maybe it was the world that
had peeled away from the words. Eliot passed him a flask
with something strong in it, and he drank and passed it
back. It seemed to restore some link between him and his
body.
Quentin drew his knees up and hugged them.
“I got hit by an arrow,” he said. It felt like a stupid thing to
say. “In my back.”
“We should go,” Eliot said.
“Right.”
“Backtrack. Try to meet back up with the others. Penny’s
got the button.” It was amazing that Eliot could still be so
practical after everything that had happened. He was so
much stronger than Quentin was.
“That big glowing guy though.”
“Yeah.”“Maybe he’s still back there.”
Eliot shrugged.
“We have to get to the button.”
Quentin was thirsty, but there was no water. He couldn’t
remember when he’d dropped his pack.
“I’ll tell you something funny,” Eliot said after a while. “I
think Anaïs hooked up with Dint.”
“What?” In spite of himself Quentin smiled. He felt his dry
lips crack. “When did they even have time?”
“Bathroom break. After that second fight.”
“Wow. Tough break for Josh. But you have to applaud
their initiative.”
“Definitely. But hard cheese on Josh.”
“Hard cheese.”
It was the kind of thing they used to say back at
Brakebills.
“I’ll tell you something else funny,” Eliot went on. “I don’t
regret coming here. Even now that it’s all gone to shit, I’m
still glad I came. Could that possibly be the stupidest thing
I’ve ever said to you? But it’s the truth. I think I was going to
drink myself to death back on Earth.”
It was true. For Eliot there hadn’t been any other way.
Somehow that made it a little bit better.
“You could still drink yourself to death here.”
“At this rate I won’t have the chance.”
Quentin stood up. His legs were stiff and achy. He did a
deep knee-bend. They started back the way they came.
Quentin didn’t feel any fear anymore. That part of it was
over, except that he was worried about Alice. The
adrenaline was gone, too. Now he was just thirsty, and his
feet hurt, and he was covered in scratches he couldn’tremember having gotten. The blood on his back had dried,
sticking his shirt to the arrow wound. It tugged
uncomfortably every time he took a step.
It became apparent pretty soon that he didn’t have
anything to worry about anyway, because they couldn’t even
find their way back to the banquet hall. They must have
taken a wrong turn somewhere, maybe several. They
stopped and tried some basic path-finding magic, but
Quentin’s tongue felt thick and clumsy, and neither of them
could seem to get the words quite right, and anyway they
really needed a dish of olive oil to make it work properly.
Quentin couldn’t think of anything to say. He waited while
Eliot took a piss against the stone wall. It felt like they’d
come to the end, but they had no choice but to keep
walking. Maybe this is still part of the story, he thought
numbly. The bad part right before everything comes out all
right. He wondered what time it was on the surface. He felt
like he’d been up all night.
The masonry of the walls was older now, crumblier. For
short stretches it was just dusty unworked cave rock. They
were at the very outer fringes of this subterranean universe,
wandering among badly eroded planets and dim, decaying
stars. The hallway had ceased to branch now. It contented
itself with curving gently to the left, and Quentin thought he
could feel the curve getting gradually tighter, like it was
spiraling inward, like the interior corridors of a nautilus
shell. He figured it stood to reason, what little reason was
left in the world, that there was a geometrical limit to how far
it could keep curving in on itself before they came to
something. Pretty soon it turned out he was right.THE RAM
Just like that, there they all were.
Quentin and Eliot stood at the edge of a large round
underground chamber, blinking at bright torchlight. It was
different from the rooms they’d already seen in that it
appeared to be naturally occurring. The floor was sandy,
the ceiling craggy and irregular and unworked, with
stalactites and other rocky excrescences poking down that
you wouldn’t want to hit your head on. The air was chilly and
damp and still. Quentin could hear an underground stream
gurgling somewhere, he couldn’t see where. The sound had
no origin or direction.
The others were here, too, all of them except for poor
Fen. Josh and Alice were in an entrance a little ways over.
Janet stood in another archway looking lost and
bedraggled, Dint and Anaïs were in the next one over, and
Penny was alone in the one after that. They stood in the
doorways like contestants framed in the spangled,
lightbulbed archways of a game show.
It was a miracle. It even looked like they’d all just arrived
at the exact same moment. Quentin took a deep breath.
Relief flooded through him like a warm liquid transfusion.
He was just so fucking glad to see every last one of them.
Even Dint—good old Dint, you hound dog! Even Penny,
and only partly because he still had his pack, presumably
with the button still inside. The story’s outcome was still in
play after all. Even after everything that had gone wrong it
could still all turn out basically okay—it was a disaster, but a
mitigated disaster. It was still possible that five years from
now, when they were more or less over their post-traumatic
stress disorder, they’d all get a big kick out of getting
together and talking about it. Maybe the real Fillory wasn’t
that different from the Fillory he’d always wanted after all.
Kings and queens, Quentin thought. Kings and queens.Glory has its price. Did you not know that?
A block of stone stood in the center of room. On it was a
large shaggy sheep—or no, it had horns, so that made it a
ram. It lay with its eyes closed, its legs folded under it, its
chin resting on a crown, a simple golden circlet snuggled
between its two shaggy front knees. Quentin wasn’t sure if it
was asleep or dead or just a very lifelike statue.
He took a tentative, exploratory step into the room,
feeling like a man setting foot on shore after a long and
grievous afternoon on a storm-tossed yacht. The sandy
floor felt reassuringly solid.
“I didn’t know—” he called hoarsely to Alice. “I wasn’t
sure if you were still alive or not!”
Josh thought Quentin was talking to him. His comical
face was ashen. He looked like a ghost seeing a ghost.
“I know.” He coughed wetly into his fist.
“What the hell happened? Did you fight that thing?”
Josh nodded shakily. “Sort of. I felt a big spell coming on,
so I just went with it. I think I finally felt what you guys feel. I
called up one of those swirly black holes. He looked at it,
then he looked at me with those freaky gold eyes, then it
just sucked him in. Headfirst. Just ate him. I saw his big red
legs sticking out kicking, and I just booked it out of there.
“Did you check out his dick though? That guy was hung!”
Quentin and Alice embraced without speaking. The
others made their way over. Stories were exchanged. It
was a reunion. Somehow everybody had managed to
make it out of the banquet hall unscathed, or at least not too
badly scathed. Anaïs showed everybody where her golden
curls got crisped off in the back as she ran. Janet was the
only one who hadn’t escaped out a side door; instead she
ran all the way to the end of the hall, which it turned out did
have an end after all, though it took her an hour to get there
(“Three years of cross country,” she said proudly). She’deven had a glass of the wine with no ill effects, apart from
mild intoxication.
They all shook their heads. What they’d all been through.
Nobody would ever believe it. Quentin was so tired he
could hardly think, except to think: we did it, we really did it.
Eliot passed the flask, and everybody drank. It had been a
game at first, and then it all got horribly real, but now it was
starting to feel like a game again, something like what
they’d been imagining on that terrible, wonderful morning
back in Manhattan. Good fun. A real adventure. After a
while they ran out of things to say, just stood in a circle
looking at each other and shaking their heads with silly
punch-drunk smiles on their faces.
A deep, dry cough interrupted them.
“Welcome.”
It was the ram. He had opened His eyes.
“Welcome, children of Earth. Welcome, too”—here he
acknowledged Dint—“you valiant child of Fillory. I am
Ember.”
He was sitting up. He had the strange, horizontal, peanut-
shaped pupils that sheep have. His thick wool was the color
of pale gold. His ears stuck out comically beneath the
heavy horns that curled back magnificently from His
forehead.
Of them all, only Penny knew what to do. He dropped his
backpack and walked over to stand in front of the ram. He
got down on his knees in the sand and bowed his head.
“We sought a crown,” he said grandly, “but we have found
a king. My lord Ember, it is my honor and privilege to offer
You my fealty.”
“Thank you, My child.”
The ram’s eyes half closed, gravely and joyfully. Thank
God, was all Quentin could think. Literally, thank God. It was
really Him. It was the only explanation. It wasn’t like they’ddone anything especially heroic to deserve this re-reversal
of fortune. Ember must have brought them here. He had
saved them. This was it, the closing credits. They’d won.
The coronation could begin.
He looked from Penny to the ram and back. He could
hear feet shuffling on the sandy floor. Somebody else
besides Penny was kneeling, Quen tin didn’t turn to see
who. He stayed standing. For some reason he wasn’t ready
to kneel down, not yet. He would in a minute, but somehow
this didn’t feel like the moment. Though it would have been
nice—he’d been walking for so long. He wasn’t sure what
to do with his hands, so he clasped them together over his
crotch.
Ember was talking, but Quentin’s mind glossed over the
words. They had a certain boilerplate quality—he’d always
skipped over Ember’s and Umber’s speeches in the
books, too. Come to think of it, if this was Ember, where
was Umber? Normally you never saw them apart.
“. . . with your help. It is time We resumed our rightful
stewardship over this land. Together We shall go forth from
this place and restore glory to Fillory, the glory of the old
days, the great days . . .”
The words washed over him. Alice could fill him in later.
In the books Ember and Umber had always come off as
slightly sinister, but in person Ember didn’t seem that bad
at all. He was nice, even. Warm. Quentin could see why the
Fillorians didn’t mind Him that much. He was like a kindly,
crinkly-eyed department-store Santa. You didn’t take Him
too seriously. He didn’t look any different from an ordinary
ram, except that He was larger and better groomed, and
He gave off more of an air of alert, alien intelligence than
you would expect from your average sheep. The effect was
unexpectedly funny.
Quentin found it hard to focus on what Ember was
saying. He was drunk on exhaustion and relief and Eliot’s
flask. He would be happy to stipulate to any big speeches.
He just wished he knew where that tantalizing, tinkling,trickling sound was coming from, because he was
perishing of thirst.
There was the crown right there, between Ember’s
hooves. Should somebody ask for it? Or would he just give
it to them when He was ready? It was ridiculous, like a
question of dinner-party etiquette. But he supposed the ram
would give it to Penny now, as a reward for his prompt
display of sycophancy, and they’d all have to be his
underlings. Maybe that was all it took. Quentin didn’t
particularly want to see Penny crowned as High King of
Fillory. After all this, was Penny going to turn out to be the
hero of this little adventure?
“I have a question.”
A voice interrupted the old ram midstream. Quentin was
surprised to find that it was his own.
Ember paused. He was quite a large animal, easily five
feet at the withers. His lips were black, and His wool looked
pleasantly soft and cloudlike. Quen tin would have liked to
bury his face in that wool, to weep in it and then fall asleep
in it. Penny craned his neck around and bulged his eyes
warningly at Quentin.
“I don’t mean to sound overly inquisitive, but if You’re, you
know, Ember, how come You’re down here in this dungeon,
and not up there on the surface helping Your people?”
In for a penny. It wasn’t that he wanted to make a huge
point about it. He just wanted to know why they’d all had to
go through so much. He wanted to square it away before
they went any further.
“I mean—and this is already coming out more
dramatically than I meant it to—You are a god, and things
are really falling apart up there. I mean, I think a lot of
people are wondering where You’ve been all this time.
That’s all. Why would You let Your people suffer like that?”
This would have worked better with a big ballsy shit-
eating grin attached to it, but instead it was coming outshivery and a little teary. He was saying “I mean” too much.
But he wasn’t backing down. Ember made an odd,
nonverbal bleating sound. His mouth worked more
sideways than a human mouth would. Quentin could see
His thick, stiff, pink ram’s tongue.
“Show some respect,” Penny muttered, but Ember raised
one black hoof.
“We should not have to remind you, human child, that We
are not your servant.” Ember spoke less gently than He had
before. “It is not your needs that We serve, but Our own. We
do not come and go at your whim.
“It is true, We have been here under the Earth for some
time. It is difficult to know how long, this far from the sun and
his travels, but some months at least. Evil has come to
Fillory, and evil must be fought, and there is no fighting
without cost. We have suffered, as you see, an
embarrassment to our hindquarters.”
He turned His long, golden head half a degree. Quentin
now saw that one of the ram’s hind legs was in fact lame.
Ember held it stiffly, so that the hoof only just brushed the
stone. It wouldn’t take His weight.
“Well, but I don’t understand,” Janet spoke up. “Quentin’s
right. You’re the god of this world. Or one of them. Doesn’t
that make You basically all-powerful?”
“There are Higher Laws that are past your understanding,
daughter. The power to create order is one thing. The
power to destroy is another. Always they are in balance.
But it is easier to destroy than to create, and there are
those whose nature it is to love destruction.”
“Well, but why would You create something that had the
power to hurt You? Or any of Your creatures? Why don’t
You help us? Do You have any idea how much we hurt?
How much we suffer?”
A stern glance. “I know all things, daughter.”“Well, okay, then know this.” Janet put her hands on her
hips. She had struck an unexpected vein of bitterness in
herself, and it was running away with her. “We human
beings are unhappy all the time. We hate ourselves and we
hate each other and sometimes we wish You or Whoever
had never created us or this shit-ass world or any other shit-
ass world. Do You realize that? So next time You might
think about not doing such a half-assed job.”
A ringing silence followed her outburst. The torches
guttered against the walls. They’d left streaks of black soot
all the way up to the domed ceiling. It was true, what she
was saying. It made him angry. But there was something
about it that made him nervous too.
“You are incensed, daughter.” Ember’s eyes were full of
kindness.
“I’m not Your daughter.” She crossed her arms. “And
yeah, no shit I’m incensed.”
The great old ram sighed deeply. A tear formed in His
great liquid eye, spilled over, and was absorbed into the
golden wool on his cheek. In spite of himself, Quentin
thought of the proud Indian in the old anti-littering
commercials. From behind him Josh leaned into Quentin’s
shoulder and whispered: “Dude! She made Ember cry!”
“The tide of evil is at the full,” the ram was saying, a
politician staying relentlessly on message. “But now that
you have come, the tide will turn.”
But it wouldn’t. Suddenly Quentin knew it. It all came to
him in one sick flash.
“You’re here against Your will,” he said. “You’re a
prisoner down here. Aren’t You?”
This wasn’t over after all.
“Human, there is so much you do not understand. You are
still but a child.”
Quentin ignored him. “That’s it, isn’t it? That’s why You’redown here? Somebody put You down here, and You can’t
get out. This wasn’t a quest, this was a rescue mission.”
Next to him Alice had both her hands over her mouth.
“Where’s Umber?” she asked. “Where is Your brother?”
Nobody moved. The ram’s long muzzle and black lips
were still and unreadable.
“Mmmm.” Eliot rubbed his chin, calmly assessing. “It is
possible.”
“Umber’s dead, isn’t He?” Alice said dully. “This place
isn’t a tomb, it’s a prison.”
“Or a trap,” Eliot said.
“Human children, listen to Me,” Ember said. “There are
Laws that go far beyond anything in your understanding.
We—”
“I’ve heard pretty much enough about my understanding,”
Janet snapped.
“But who did it?” Eliot stared down at the sand, thinking
fast. “Who even has the muscle to do this to Ember? And
why? I suppose it was the Watcherwoman, but this is all
very odd.”
Quentin felt a prickling in his shoulders. He looked
around at the dark corners of the cave they were in. It
wouldn’t be long before whatever had broken Ember’s leg
turned up, and they would have to fight again. He didn’t
know if he could take another fight. Penny was still on his
knees, but the back of his neck as he looked up at Ember
was flushed crimson.
“Maybe it’s time to hit the ol’ panic button,” Josh said.
“Back to the Neitherlands.”
“I have a better idea,” Quentin said.
They had to get control of the situation. They could quit
now, but the crown was right there, right in front of them.They were so close. They were almost home, they could still
win it all if they could just figure out a way to push through to
the end of the story. If they could gut it out through one more
scene.
And he realized he knew how.
Penny had dropped his pack on the sandy floor. Quentin
bent down and rummaged through it. Of course Penny had
webbed and bungeed the fucking thing to within an inch of
its life, but in among the Power Bars and the Leatherman
and the spare tighty whiteys, wrapped in a red bandanna,
he found what he was looking for.
The horn was smaller than he remembered it.
“Right? Remember what the nymph said?” He held it up.
“ ‘When all hope is lost’? Or something like that?”
“I wouldn’t say all hope is lost . . .” Josh said.
“Let me see that,” Dint said imperiously. He had been
conspicuously silent since Ember woke up. Anaïs clung to
his arm.
Quentin ignored him. Everybody was talking at once.
Penny and the ram were locked in some kind of intense
lover’s quarrel.
“Interesting,” Eliot said. He shrugged. “It might work. I’d
rather try that than go back to the City. Who do you think will
come?”
“Human child,” the ram said loudly. “Human child!”
“Go for it, Q,” Janet said. She looked paler than she
should have. “It’s time. Go for it.”
Alice just nodded gravely.
The silver mouthpiece tasted metallic against his lips,
like a nickel or a battery. The breath he took was so deep
that pain lanced hotly into his arrow-stuck shoulder as his
ribs expanded. He wasn’t sure exactly what to do—purse
his lips like a trumpeter, or just blow into it like a kazoo?—but the ivory horn produced a clear, even, high note as
gentle and round as a French horn winded by a seasoned
symphony player in a concert hall. Everybody stopped
talking and turned to look at him. It wasn’t loud, exactly, but
it made everything else quiet around it, so that it was
instantly the only sound in the room, and everything
resonated with its pure, simple strength. It was natural and
perfect, a single note that sounded like a grand chord. It
went on and on. He blew until his lungs were empty.
The sound echoed and faded away, gone as if it had
never been. The cavern was still. For a moment Quentin felt
ridiculous, like he’d just blown a noisemaker. What was he
expecting, anyway? He really didn’t know.
There was a snuffling sound from Ember’s pedestal.
“O child,” came the ram’s deep voice. “Don’t you know
what you have done?”
“I just got us out of this mess. That’s what I’ve done.”
The ram drew Himself up.
“I am sorry you came here,” Ember said. “Children of
Earth. No one asked you to come. I am sorry that our world
is not the paradise you were looking for. But it was not
created for your entertainment. Fillory”—the old ram’s jowls
shook—“is not a theme park, for you and your friends to
play dress-up in, with swords and crowns.”
He was visibly mastering some powerful emotion. It took
Quentin a moment to recognize it. It was fear. The old ram
was choking on it.
“That’s not why we came here, Ember,” Quentin said
quietly.
“Is it not?” Ember said, basso profundo. “No, of course it
is not.” His alien eyes were hard to meet, with their molten
yellow whites and black pupils like figure eights on their
sides, symbols of infinity. “You came here to save us. You
came here to be our King.“But tell me something, Quentin. How could you hope to
save us when you cannot even save yourself ?”
Quentin was spared the necessity of answering, because
that was when the catastrophe began.
A small man in a neat gray suit appeared in the cave. His
face was obscured by a leafy branch that hung in front of it
in midair. He looked exactly the way Quentin remembered.
The same suit, the same club tie. His face was no less
illegible. He held his pink, manicured hands clasped
urbanely in front of him. It was as if Quentin had never left
the classroom where he first appeared. In a way he
supposed he never had. The terror was so absolute, so all-
encompassing, that it was almost like calm: not a suspicion
but the absolute certainty that they were all about to die.
The Beast spoke.
“I believe that was my cue.” His tone was mild, his accent
patrician English.
Ember roared. The sound was colossal. It shook the
room, and a stalactite fell and shattered. The inside of
Ember’s mouth was mottled pink and black. At that moment
the ram no longer looked quite so ridiculous. There were
great humps of muscle under all that fluffy wool, like
boulders under moss, and His ribbed horns were thick and
stony—they curled all the way around so that the two sharp
tips pointed forward. Head down, He surged down off the
stone plinth at the man in the gray suit.
The Beast slapped Him aside with a smooth, unhurried
backhand motion. The gesture was almost casual. Ember
shot sideways like a rocket and hit the rock wall with a
sickening, boneless smack. The physics of it looked wrong,
as if the ram were as light as a leaf and the Beast as dense
as dwarf star matter. Ember dropped motionless to the
sandy floor.
He lay where He fell. The Beast flicked woolly fluff off one
immaculate gray sleeve with the backs of his fingers.“It’s a funny thing about the old gods,” he said. “You think
that just because they’re old they must be difficult to kill. But
when the fighting starts, they go down just like anybody
else. They aren’t stronger, they’re just older.”
There was a sandy shuffling from behind Quentin. He
risked a glance: Dint had turned on his heel and walked out
of the room. The Beast did nothing to stop him. Quentin
suspected the rest of them wouldn’t get off that easily.
“Yes, he was one of mine,” the Beast said. “Farvel was,
too, if you want to know the whole truth. The birch tree, you
remember him? They mostly are. The rams’ time is over.
Fillory is my world now.”
It wasn’t a boast, just a statement of fact. Fucking Dint,
Quentin thought. And I pretended to like his stupid vest.
“I knew you’d come for me. It’s hardly a surprise. I’ve
been waiting for you for ages. But is this really all of you?
It’s a bad joke, you know.” He gave an incredulous snort.
“You’ve no chance at all.”
He sighed.
“I suppose I won’t be needing this anymore. I’d almost
gotten used to it.”
Almost absentmindedly the Beast plucked the branch
that hung in front of his face with a thumb and forefinger, as
if he were taking off a pair of sunglasses, and tossed it
lightly aside.
Quentin cringed—he didn’t want to see its real face—but
it was too late. And it turned out he had nothing to worry
about, because it was an utterly ordinary face. It could have
been the face of an insurance adjuster: round, mild, soft-
chinned, boyish.
“Nothing? You don’t recognize me?”
The Beast strode over to the stone plinth, picked up the
crown that still lay there, and placed it on his graying
temples.“My God,” Quentin said. “You’re Martin Chatwin.”
“In the flesh,” the Beast announced cheerfully. “And my,
how I’ve grown!”
“I don’t understand,” Alice said shakily. “How can you be
Martin Chatwin?”
“But surely you knew? Isn’t that why you’re here?” He
searched their faces but got no answer. They were frozen in
place—not magically this time, just paralyzed the regular
way, with fear. He frowned. “Well, I don’t suppose it matters.
But I would have thought that was the whole point. It’s a little
insulting, really.”
He pouted for show, a sad clown. It was disturbing to see
a middle-aged man with the mannerisms of a little English
schoolboy. It really was him. He hadn’t grown up at all. He
even had a curiously miniature, asexual quality, as if he’d
stopped growing the moment he’d run away into that forest.
“What happened to you?” Quentin asked.
“What happened?” The Beast spread his arms
triumphantly. “Why, I got what I wanted. I went to Fillory, and
I never came back!”
It was all becoming clear. Martin Chatwin hadn’t been
stolen by monsters, he had become one. He had found
what Quentin thought he wanted, a way to stay in Fillory, to
leave the real world behind forever. But the price had been
high.
“I wasn’t going to go back to Earth after I’d seen Fillory. I
mean, you can’t show a man paradise and then snatch it
back again. That’s what gods do. But I say: down with
gods.”
“It’s amazing what you can accomplish if you put your
mind to it. I made some very interesting friends in the
Darkling Woods. Very helpful chaps.” He spoke genially,
expansively, like a toastmaster at a dinner party. “Mind you,
the kinds of things you have to do to work that kind of magic—well, your humanity is the first thing to go. You don’t stay a
man once you’ve done the things I’ve done. Once you know
the things I know. I hardly miss it now.”
“Friends,” Quentin
Watcherwoman.”
said
dully.
“You
mean
the
“The Watcherwoman!” Martin seemed to find this
hilarious. “Oh, my! That is amusing. Sometimes I forget
what’s in those books. I’ve been here a very long time, you
know. I haven’t read them in centuries.
“No, not the Watcherwoman. Goodness, the crowd I run
with make her look like—well, they make her look like you.
Amateurs.
“But enough chit-chat. Who’s got the button?”
The button was, of course, in Penny’s bag, which lay right
at Quentin’s feet. I did this, he thought, with a pang that ran
all the way through him. This is twice. Twice I’ve summoned
the Beast. I’m a curse on everyone around me.
“Button, button, who’s got the button? Who’s got it?”
Penny began backing away from the thing in the gray
suit, at the same time starting up a spell—another secret
weapon, maybe, Quen tin didn’t recognize it. But Martin
moved invisibly fast, like a poisonous fish striking. In a blur
he had both of Penny’s wrists in the grip of one hand.
Penny struggled wildly; he bent at the waist and kicked
Martin in the stomach, then braced his legs against his
chest and pushed to try to get free, grunting with the effort.
The Beast barely seemed to notice.
“I’m afraid not, dear boy,” he said.
He opened his mouth wide, too wide, as if his jaw were
unhinging like a snake’s, and placed both of Penny’s hands
in his mouth. He bit them off at the wrists.
It wasn’t a clean bite. Martin Chatwin had blunt human
teeth, not fangs, and it took an extra shake of his calm,
middle-aged head to fully crush the wrist bones and detachPenny’s hands. Then the Beast dropped him, chewing
busily, and Penny fell back on the sand. Arterial blood
sprayed crazily from the stumps, then he rolled over and
they were underneath him. His legs thrashed like he was
being electrocuted. He didn’t scream, but frantic snuffling
noises came from where his face was pushed into the
sandy floor. His sneakers scrabbled in the dirt.
The Beast swallowed once, twice, his Adam’s apple
bobbing. He grinned, almost embarrassed, holding up one
finger while he chewed: give me a moment. His eyes
narrowed with pleasure.
“Shit shit shit shit shit . . .” somebody wailed, high and
desperate. Anaïs.
“Now,” Martin Chatwin said, when he could speak again.
“I’d like the button, please.”
They stared at him.
“Why,” Eliot said numbly. “What are you?”
Martin took out his handkerchief and dabbed Penny’s
blood from the corner of his mouth.
“Why, I’m what you thought that was.” He indicated
Ember’s motionless body. “I’m a god.”
Quentin’s chest was so tight that he kept taking tense
irregular little breaths, in and out.
“But why do you want it?” he asked.
Talking was good. Talking was better than killing.
“Just tying up loose ends,” Martin said. “I would have
thought it was obvious. The buttons are the only things I
know of that could force me to return to Earth. I’ve got
almost all of them rounded up. Just one more after this.
Goodness knows where the bunnies got them. I still haven’t
figured that out.
“Do you know, when I first ran away, they hunted me like
an animal? My own siblings? They wanted to bring mehome. Like an animal!” His urbane manner cracked for an
instant. “Later Ember and Umber came looking for me, too,
to try to deport me, but by then it was much too late for that.
Much too late. I was too strong even for them.
“That bloody cunt of a Watcherwoman is still at it, with her
damned clock-trees. Mucking about with time. Even now
their roots go halfway through this bloody world. She’s next
after you, she’s still got a button. The last one. Once I’ve got
hers I really don’t think there’ll be any way to get rid of me at
all.”
Penny rolled over onto his side. He looked up at Quentin,
his face strangely ecstatic, though paler than ever and
covered in sand. His eyes were closed. He had the stumps
of his wrists pressed tight against his chest. His shirt was
wringing wet with blood.
“Is it bad, Q?” Penny asked. “I’m not going to look. You
tell me. How bad is it?”
“You’re all right, man,” Quentin muttered.
Martin could not suppress a joyless clubman’s chuckle at
that. He went on.
“I’ve been back once or twice, of course, by myself. Once
to kill the old bugger, Plover.” His smooth brow crinkled,
and he looked thoughtful. “He earned that. That and more. I
wish I had him to kill again.
“And I nipped through once when your Professor March
bungled a spell. Just to keep an eye on things. I thought
somebody at Brakebills might be planning something—I
get a sort of sense of the future sometimes. It appears that I
was right. Though I must have eaten the wrong student.”
Martin clapped his hands together and rubbed them in
anticipation.
“Well, that’s all bygones,” he said, perking up. “Let’s have
it.”
“We hid it again,” Alice said. “Like your sister Helen. Weburied the button. Kill us and you’ll never find it.”
My brave Alice. Quentin gripped her hand. I brought this
on us. His knees were trembling uncontrollably.
“Oh, well played, my girl. Shall I start ripping people’s
heads off, one by one? I think you’ll tell me before it comes
to that.”
“Wait, why would you kill us at all?” Quentin asked. “Fuck
it, we’ll just give you the button. Just leave us alone!”
“Oh, I wish I could do that, Quentin. I truly do. But you see,
this place changes you.” Martin sighed and waggled his
extra fingers, his hands like pale spiders. “It’s why the rams
didn’t like humans staying here too long. As it is, I’ve almost
gone too far. I’ve got quite a taste for human flesh now.
Don’t you go anywhere, William,” he added, nudging
Penny’s twitching body with the toe of his shoe. “Fauns just
don’t have the same savor.”
William, Quentin thought. That must be Penny’s real
name. He never knew it before.
“And you know, I can’t have you lot running around trying
to overthrow me. Treason, that is. Everybody notice that I’ve
crippled your principal spellcaster? You got that?”
“You pathetic fucker.” Quentin said evenly. “It wasn’t even
worth it, was it? That’s the funny part. You came here for the
same reason we did. And are you happy now? You found
out, didn’t you? There’s no getting away from yourself. Not
even in Fillory.”
Martin snarled and made an enormous bound forward,
covering the thirty feet that separated them in a single leap.
At the last second Quen tin turned to run, but the monster
was already on his back, his teeth in Quentin’s shoulder, his
arms hugging Quentin’s chest. The Beast’s jaws were like
a huge hungry pliers gripping his collarbone. It bent and
cracked sickeningly.
The jaws regripped, getting a better hold on him. Quentinheard himself make an involuntary groan as the air was
crushed out of his lungs. He was so afraid of the pain, but
when it came down to it it wasn’t so much the pain as the
pressure, the incredible, unbearable pressure. He couldn’t
breathe. Quentin thought for an instant he might be able to
manage some magic, maybe something grand and strange
like he had that first day at Brakebills, in his Examination,
but he couldn’t speak to cast a spell. He reached back with
his hands—maybe he could find Martin’s eyes with his
thumbs, or rip his ears—but all he could do was pull
Martin’s thin gray English hair.
Martin’s panting breath roared in Quentin’s ear like a
lover’s. He still looked mostly human, but at this range he
was pure animal, snuffling and growling and reeking of
alien musk. Tears started from Quentin’s eyes. It was all
ending now, this was the big finale. Eaten alive by a
Chatwin, for the sake of a button. It was almost funny. He’d
always assumed he’d survive, but everybody assumes that,
don’t they? He thought it would all be so different. There
must have been a better way. What had been his first
mistake? There were so many.
But then the pressure was gone, and his ears were
ringing. Alice had her pale fingers wrapped in a double fist
around Janet’s blue-black revolver. Her face was white, but
her hands were steady. She fired two more shots,
broadside, into Martin’s ribs, then he turned to face her and
she fired straight into his chest. Pulverized bits of the
Beast’s suit and tie spun and floated in the air.
Quentin thrashed forward, a primordial fish heaving itself
up onto a sandy bank, sucking wind, anything to get away.
Now the real pain was coming. His right arm was numb and
dragging and not quite as firmly attached to him as he was
used to. He tasted blood in his mouth. He heard Alice fire
twice more.
When he thought he was far enough away, he risked a
look back. His peripheral vision was going gray around the
edges. It was closing in in a circle, like the final moments ofa Porky Pig cartoon. But he could see Alice and Martin
Chatwin facing each other across ten empty paces of sand.
Out of bullets. She tossed the revolver backhand back to
Janet.
“All right,” she said quietly. “Let’s see what else your
friends taught you.”
Her voice sounded very small in the silent cave, but not
afraid. Martin regarded her with bemused curiosity. He
cocked his head at an angle. What was she thinking? Was
she really going to try to fight him? Ten long, still seconds
ticked by.
When he rushed her, Alice was ready. She was the only
one. There was no warning: he went at her from a standing
start—first he was still, then he was a blur. Quentin didn’t
know how she could react so fast, when he could barely
track Martin’s movements, but before the Beast was even
halfway to her she had him up in the air, his legs churning
pathetically, gripped in an iron kinetic spell. She slammed
him to the ground so hard he bounced.
He was on his feet again almost at once, smoothing out
his suit, and he came at her again without even seeming to
set himself. This time she stepped to one side like a
matador, and he blew past her. Alice was moving like the
Beast now—she must have sped up her own reaction time,
the way Penny had with the arrow. With a massive effort
Quentin pushed himself up till he was half sitting, then
something gave in his chest and he collapsed back down
again.
“Are you following this?” Alice asked Martin. There was a
growing confidence in her voice, as if she were trying
bravado on for size and finding that she liked it. “You didn’t
see it coming, did you? And this is just straight Flemish
praxis. Nothing else. I haven’t even gotten to any Eastern
material yet.”
With a crack the Beast snapped off a stalagmite at thebase and whipped it sidearm at Alice, but the stone spear
burst in midair before it reached her. Fragments whined
away in all directions. Quentin wasn’t tracking it all, but he
didn’t think she’d done that. The others must be backing
her up, a phalanx with Alice at the head.
Though Alice was way ahead of them. Maybe poor
Penny could have followed what she was doing, but Alice
was in a place Quentin hadn’t known she could go. He was
a magician, but she was something else, a true adept. He
had no idea she was so far beyond him. There was a time
when he might have felt envious of her, but now he felt only
pride. That was his Alice. Sand rushed hissing from the
floor in a shroud, like a swarm of enraged bees, and
wrapped itself around Martin’s head, trying to penetrate his
mouth and nose and ears. He twisted and flailed his arms
frantically.
“Oh, Martin.” A smile played at the corners of her mouth.
It was almost wicked. “That’s the trouble with monsters. No
theoretical rigor. No one ever made you iron out your
fundamentals, did they? If they had, you certainly wouldn’t
fall for this . . .”
In his blinded state Martin walked straight into a fireball à
la Penny that burst over him. But Alice didn’t wait. She
couldn’t afford to. Her lips never stopped moving, and her
hands never stopped their fluid, unhurried motions, one
spell rolling right over into the next. It was high-stakes blitz
chess. The fireball was followed by a glimmering spherical
prison, then by a toxic hail of Magic Missiles—she must
have taken apart that spell and supercharged it so that it
yielded a whole flock of them. The sand she’d whipped up
from the floor gathered and fused into a faceless glass
golem, which landed two jabs and a roundhouse punch
before Martin shattered it with a counterpunch. But he
seemed disoriented. His round English face was an
ominous flustered red. A colossal, crushing weight seemed
to settle on his shoulders, some kind of invisible yoke that
took him down to one knee.Anaïs projected an ocher lightning strike at Martin that left
behind a bloodshot afterimage on Quentin’s retinas, and
Eliot and Josh and Janet had joined hands and were
sending a hail of rocks that beat on his back. The room was
full of a babel of incantations, but Martin didn’t seem to
notice. Alice was the only one he saw.
From a half crouch he lunged at her across the sand, and
some kind of phantasmal armor materialized around her,
like nothing Quentin had ever seen before, silvery and
translucent—it flickered in and out of visibility. The Beast’s
fingers slid off it. The armor came with a shimmery pole
arm that Alice spun in one hand, then set and thrust at
Martin’s stomach. Sparks flew between them.
“Fergus’s Spectral Armory!” she shouted. She was
breathing hard. His eyes were red and fixed on her grimly.
“Like it? Do you? Very basic principles. Second Year stuff!
But then you never bothered with school, did you, Martin?
You wouldn’t have lasted an hour at Brakebills!”
Seeing her fight alone like this was intolerable. Quentin
lifted his cheek from the sandy floor and tried to speak a
spell, anything, even to create a distraction, but his lips
wouldn’t shape words. His fingers were going numb. He
beat his hands against the ground in frustration. He had
never loved Alice more. He felt like he was sending her his
strength, even though he knew she couldn’t feel it.
Alice and Martin sparred savagely for a solid minute. The
armor spell must have come with a bonus of martial arts
savvy, because Alice whipped her faerie glaive around in a
complicated pattern, two-handed now; it had a small,
vicious spike on its butt end that drew blood. Sweat matted
her hair to her forehead, but she never lost focus. After
another minute the armor vanished—the spell must have
expired—and she did something that froze the air around
the Beast into an intricate frostwork mummy. Even his
clothes froze and fell to pieces in shards, leaving him naked
and fish-belly white.
But by then he was close enough to seize her arm.Suddenly she was a girl again, small and vulnerable.
But not for long. She spat out a ferocious sequence of
syllables and transformed into a tawny lioness with a white
scruff of beard under her chin. She and Martin went down
grappling, mouths gaping, trying to get their teeth into each
other. Alice worked with her huge back legs to scratch and
disembowel, caterwauling angrily.
Janet was circling the fight, trying to cram bullets into the
revolver and dropping them freely on the sand, but there
was nowhere to aim anyway. They were all tangled up
together. The next moment the Beast was in the coils of a
massive spotted anaconda, then Alice was an eagle, then
a huge brindled bear, then a horrific man-size scorpion with
pincing legs and its venomous sting, the size of a crane
hook, lodged in Martin Chatwin’s back. Light flashed and
crackled around them as they fought, and their struggling
bodies rose from the ground. The Beast was on top of her,
and Alice expanded hugely to become a limber, sinuous
white dragon on its back, her enormous wings slapping the
sand and sending everybody scrambling. The Beast grew
with her, so that she was wrestling a giant. She gripped him
in her talons and screamed a torrent of blue fire like jet
exhaust straight into his face.
For a minute he writhed in Alice’s grip. His eyebrows
were gone, and his face was comically blackened. Quentin
could hear the Alice-dragon panting raggedly. The Beast
shuddered and was still for a moment. Then he appeared
to compose himself, and he punched Alice once, hard, in
the face.
Instantly she was human again. Her nose was bleeding.
Martin rolled neatly to one side and got to his feet. Naked
though he was, he produced a clean handkerchief from
somewhere and used it to dab some of the soot from his
face.
“Dammit,” Quentin rasped. “Somebody do something!
Help her!”Janet got one last bullet in and fired, then she threw the
pistol overhand. It bounced off the back of Martin Chatwin’s
head without mussing his hair.
“Fuck you!” she shouted.
Martin took a step toward Alice. No. This had to end.
“Hey, asshole!” Quentin managed. “You forgot one thing.”
He spat blood and switched to his best Cubano accent,
his voice cracking hysterically: “Say hello to my leel friend!”
Quentin whispered the catchword Fogg had given him
the night of graduation. He’d imagined it in his head a
hundred times, and now as he pronounced the final syllable
something big and hard was struggling and thrashing under
his shirt, scrabbling at the skin of his back.
Looking up at it, Quentin noticed that his cacodemon
was wearing a little pair of round spectacles hooked over
its pointy ears. What the fuck, his cacodemon had glasses?
It stood over him, uncertain, looking learned and thoughtful.
It didn’t know whom to fight.
“The naked guy,” Quentin said in a hoarse whisper. “Go!
Save the girl!”
The demon skidded to a stop ten feet from its prey. It
feinted left, then left again, like it was playing one-on-one
with Martin, trying to break his ankles, before it gathered
itself and sprang directly for his face. Wearily, as if to
express to them the unfairness of the trouble they were
putting him through, Martin put up a hand to catch it in flight.
The demon tore at his fingers, hissing. Martin began slowly
stuffing it into his mouth, like a gecko eating a spider, while
it pulled his hair and gouged at his eyes.
Quentin waved at Alice frantically to run—maybe if they
all split up?—but she wasn’t looking at him. She licked her
lips and tucked her hair behind her ears with both hands.
She got to her feet.
Something had changed in her face. She had made adecision. She began to work with her hands, the
preliminaries to something very advanced. At the sound
both Martin and the cacodemon looked at her. Martin took
the opportunity to break the demon’s neck and push the
rest of its body into his mouth.
“So,” she said. “So you think you’re the biggest monster
in this room?”
“Don’t,” Janet said, but Alice didn’t stop. She was trying
something. Everybody seemed to get it except Quentin.
“No, no, no!” Eliot said angrily. “Wait!”
“You’re not even a magician at all, are you, Martin?” Alice
said quietly. “You’re just a little boy. That’s all you are.
That’s all you ever were.” She bit back a sob. “Well, I’m
sorry.”
She closed her eyes and began to recite. Quentin could
see it all in Alice’s face, everything they’d been through,
everything they’d done to each other, everything they’d
gotten past. She was letting it all come out. It was a big
spell, Renaissance, very academic magic. Big energies.
He couldn’t imagine what good it would do, but a moment
later he realized the spell wasn’t the point. The side effects
were the point.
He began scratching his way toward her, anything he
could do to get closer. He didn’t care if it killed him.
“No!” he shouted. “No!”
The blue fire began in her fingertips and spread,
inexorably, through her hands and up her wrists. It lit up her
face. Alice opened her eyes again. She regarded it with
fascination.
“I’m on fire,” she said, almost in her normal voice. “I didn’t
think—I’m burning.” And then in a rising shriek that could
have been agony or could have been ecstasy: “I’m burning!
Oh, God! Oh, Quentin, I’m burning! It’s burning me!”
Martin halted his slow advance to observe as Alicebecame a niffin . Quentin couldn’t see his expression. Alice
took a step backward and sat down, still staring at her
arms. They were now blue fire up to the shoulders. They
were like two highway flares; her flesh was not consumed
but, strangely, replaced by the fire that was chewing through
it. She stopped speaking, just moaned on an ever-higher,
ever-louder note. Finally as the blue fire rose up her neck
she threw back her head and opened her mouth wide, but
no more sound came out.
The fire left behind it a new Alice, one that was smaller
and made of something like blue glowing glass, fresh and
hot from the furnace. The process flooded the cavern with
blue light. Even before the transformation was complete
Alice had left the ground. She was pure fire now, her face
full of that special madness belonging to things that are
neither living nor dead. She floated above the floor as
easily as if she were floating in a swimming pool.
The spirit that had replaced Alice, the niffin , regarded
them neutrally with furious, insane, empty sapphire eyes.
For all her power she looked delicate, like she was blown
from Murano glass. From where he lay Quen tin watched
with detached, academic interest through a red haze of
agony. The capacity for terror or love or grief or anything but
pain had gone along with his peripheral vision.
She was not Alice. She was a righteous destroying
angel. She was blue and nude and wore an expression of
irrepressible hilarity.
Quentin had stopped breathing. For a moment Alice
hovered before the Beast, incandescent with anticipation.
At the last instant he appeared to sense that the odds had
shifted and began a step backward, then he bolted in a
blur. But even then he was too slow. The angel had him by
his gray, conservatively cut hair. Bracing her other hand on
his shoulder, she tore Martin Chatwin’s head off his neck
with a crisp, dry ripping sound.
All of this action had become too exhausting for Quentinto watch. He clung to it like a faltering radio signal, but it
was so hard to maintain clear reception. He rolled
languorously over onto his back.
His mind had become a loopy parody of itself, stretched
thin as taffy, translucent as cellophane. Something
unspeakable had happened, but he couldn’t keep hold of it.
Somehow the world as he knew it was no longer there.
He’d managed to find a reasonably soft, sandy patch of
floor to recline on—it was thoughtful of Martin, really, to
have brought them to a room where the sand was so
deliciously fine and cool. Although it was a shame that this
clean white sand was now almost entirely saturated with
blood, his and Penny’s. He wondered if Penny was still
alive. He wondered if it would be at all possible to pass out.
He wanted to fall asleep and never wake up.
Quentin heard the scuff of a fine leather shoe, and Eliot
loomed into the patch of ceiling directly above him, then
passed by.
From somewhere ambiguous in space and time,
Ember’s voice reached Quentin. Not dead yet, he thought.
Tough bastard. Or maybe he was just imagining it.
“You have won,” the ram’s voice bleated from the
shadows. “Take your prize, hero.”
Eliot picked up the golden crown of the High King of
Fillory. With an inarticulate cry he threw it like a discus off
into the darkness.
The last dream was broken. Quentin either fainted or
died, he didn’t know which.BOOK IVTHE RETREAT
Quentin woke up in a beautiful white room. For a second—
or was it an hour? a week?—he thought it was his room in
Brakebills South, that he was back in Antarctica. But then
he saw that the window was open and heavy green curtains
were puffing in, and out, and in again with the coming and
going of a warm summer wind. So definitely not Antarctica.
He lay looking up at the ceiling, letting himself drift and
spin along on spacey, narcotic mental currents. He didn’t
feel even remotely curious about where he was or how he’d
gotten there. He blissed out on insignificant details: the
sunlight, the smell of clean linens, a splinter of blue sky in
the window, the gnarly whorls of the dark chocolate brown
timbers that crossed the whitewashed ceiling. He was
alive.
And those nice, surprisingly Pottery Barn-y curtains, the
color of the stems of plants. They were coarse-woven, but it
wasn’t the familiar, depressing fake-authentic coarseness
of high-end Earth housewares, which merely imitated the
real coarseness of fabrics that were woven by hand out of
genuine necessity. As he lay there Quentin’s uppermost
thought was that these were authentically coarse-woven
curtains, woven by people who didn’t know any other way
of making curtains, who didn’t even know that their way was
special, and whose way was therefore not discounted and
emptied of meaning in advance. This made him very
happy. It was as if he’d been looking for these curtains
forever, as if he’d been waiting his whole life to wake up
one morning in a room in which those coarse-woven, stem-
green curtains hung over the windows.
From time to time a horsy clippety-clopping could be
heard from the hall outside. This mystery solved itself when
a woman with the body of a horse stepped partway into the
room. The effect was surprisingly unsurprising. She was a
sturdy, sun-kissed woman with short brown hair who justhappened to be attached to the chassis of a sleek black
mare.
“You are conscious?” she asked.
Quentin cleared his throat. He couldn’t get it all the way
clear. It was horribly dry, too dry to speak, so he just
nodded.
“Your recovery is nearly complete,” the centauress said,
with the air of a busy senior resident doing rounds who
didn’t have time to waste rejoicing over medical miracles.
She began the slow process of reversing herself, daintily,
purposefully, back out into the hall.
“You have been asleep for six months and two days,” she
added before she disappeared.
Quentin listened to her clippety-clop away. It was quiet
again. He did his best to hang on to the blissful feeling. But
it didn’t last.
The six months of his recovery were practically a blank—
just a quickly evaporating impression of blue depths and
complex, enchanted dreams. But Quentin’s memories of
what happened in Ember’s Tomb were very clear. He might
reasonably have expected that day (or had it been night?)
to fall in a blackout period, or at least be veiled in merciful
post-traumatic haziness. But no, not at all. He could
remember it with perfect fidelity, deep focus, full force, from
any angle, right up until the moment he lost consciousness.
The shock of it snapped his chest flat. It emptied out his
lungs the way the Beast’s jaws had, not just once but over
and over again. He was helpless against it. He lay in his
bed and sobbed until he choked. His weak body spasmed.
He made noises he’d never heard a human being make.
He ground his face into his flat, prickly straw pillow until it
was wet with tears and snot. She had died for him, for all of
them, and she was never coming back.
He couldn’t think about what happened, he could only
play it back again and again, as if there were a chance itcould come out differently, or even just hurt a little less, but
every time he played it back he wanted to die. His half-
healed body ached all over, as if it were bruised right down
to his skeleton, but he wanted it to hurt even more. He didn’t
know how to operate in a world that would allow this to
happen. It was a shit world, a fraud and a con, and he
wanted nothing more to do with it. Whenever he slept, he
woke up trying to warn somebody of something, but he
never knew what, or who, and it was always too late.
With the sorrow came anger. What had they been
thinking? A bunch of kids walking into a civil war in an alien
world? Alice was dead (and Fen, and probably Penny, too)
and the worst part was that he could have saved them all,
and he hadn’t. He was the one who told them it was time to
go to Fillory. He’d blown the horn that summoned the Beast.
Alice had come because of him, to take care of him. But he
hadn’t taken care of her.
The centaurs watched him weep with alien unconcern,
like fish.
He learned over the next few days that he was in a
monastery, or something like it, or that was as much as he
could gather from the centaurs who ran the place. It wasn’t
a place of worship, they explained, with a note of whinnying
condescension, but a community devoted to the most
absolute possible expression, or incarnation—or perhaps
realization was an even better word—of the
incomprehensibly complex but infinitely pure sylvan values
of centaurhood, which Quentin’s fallen human brain could
never hope to grasp. There was something distinctly
German about the centaurs.
It came out, not very tactfully, that they considered
humans to be inferior beings. It wasn’t the humans’ fault.
They were simply cripples, severed by an unhappy accident
of birth from their rightful horse halves. The centaurs
regarded Quentin with pity nicely tempered by a near-total
lack of interest. Also, they seemed to be constantly afraid
that he was going to tip over.None of them had any exact memory of how Quentin had
gotten here. They didn’t pay close attention to the backstory
of the occasional damaged human who fetched up in their
midst. When pressed, Quentin’s doctor, a terrifyingly
earnest individual whose name was Alder Acorn Agnes
Allison fragrant-timber, said she vaguely remembered
some humans, unusually filthy and bedraggled specimens,
now that you mention it, bringing Quen tin in on a makeshift
litter. He’d been unconscious and deep in shock, with his
rib cage crushed and one of his forelimbs badly dislocated,
practically detached. Such anatomical disorder was
distasteful to the centaurs. And they were not insensible of
the service the humans had rendered to Fillory in ridding it
of Martin Chatwin. They did their best to render assistance.
The humans lingered in the area for a month, maybe two,
while the centaurs wove deep webs of wood-magic around
Quentin’s torn, bruised, insulted body. But they thought it
unlikely that he would ever wake up. And in time, as Quentin
showed no signs of recovering consciousness, the humans
reluctantly departed.
He supposed he could have been angry that they had left
him there, in Fillory, with no way of returning to his own
world. But all he felt was warm, cowardly relief. He didn’t
have to face them. The sight of their faces would have
burned the skin right off him with shame. He wished he had
died, and if he couldn’t have death, at least he had this, the
next best thing: total isolation, lost forever in Fillory. He was
broken in a way that magic could never fix.
His body was still weak, and he spent a lot of time in bed,
resting his atrophied muscles. He was an empty shell,
roughly hollowed out by some crude tool, gutted and left
there, a limp, raw, boneless skin. If he tried, he could
summon up old sense-memories. Nothing from Fillory or
Brakebills, just the really old stuff, the easy stuff, the safe
stuff. The smell of his mother’s oil paints; the lurid green of
the Gowanus Canal; the curious way Julia pursed her lips
around the reed of her oboe; the hurricane that blewthrough when they took that family vacation in Maine, he
must have been about eight, when they went out on the lawn
and threw their sweaters in the air and watched them sail
away over the neighbor’s fence and then fell down laughing.
A beautiful blossoming white cherry tree stood outside his
window in the warm afternoon sunlight. Every part of it
moved and swayed in a slightly different rhythm from every
other part. He watched it for a long time.
If he was feeling daring, he thought about the time he’d
spent as a goose flying south, wingtip to wingtip with Alice,
buoyed up by pillowy masses of empty air, gazing coolly
down at looping, squiggly, switchbacked rivers. If he did it
now, he thought, he would remember to look out for the
Nazca Lines in Peru. He wondered if he could go back to
Professor Van der Weghe and have her change him back,
and he would just stay that way, live and die as a stupid
goose and forget that he’d ever even been a human.
Sometimes he thought of a day he’d spent with Alice on the
roof of the Cottage. They had a joke that they were going to
play on the others when they got back from somewhere, but
the others never came home, and he and Alice had just lain
up there on the warm shingles all afternoon, looking at the
sky and talking about nothing.
A few days of this went a long way. His body was healing
fast and getting restless, and his brain was waking up and
needed new diversions to distract it. It wouldn’t leave him
alone for long.
Onward and upward. He couldn’t stop himself from
getting better. Soon Quentin was out and about and
exploring the grounds, a walking skeleton. Severed from
his past, and from everything and everyone he knew, he felt
as insubstantial and semi-existent as a ghost. The
monastery—the centaur name for it was the Retreat—was
all stone colonnades and towering trees and wide, well-
maintained paths. Despite himself, he was ravenously
hungry, and although the centaurs were strict vegetarians
they turned out to be wizards with salad. At mealtimes they
set out huge heaping wooden troughs full of spinach andlettuce and arugula and sharp dandelion greens, all
delicately oiled and spiced. He discovered the centaur
baths, six rectangular stone pools of varying temperatures,
each one large enough that he could do three long, deep
breatstrokes from one edge to the other. They reminded
him of the Roman baths in Alice’s parents’ house. And they
were deep, too: if he dove in and kicked downward with
enough vigor, until the light dimmed and his hindbrain
complained and the water pressure forced its fingers into
his ears, he could still just barely brush the rough stone
bottom with his fingers.
His mind was an icy pond constantly in danger of
thawing. He trod on it only lightly—its surface was perilously
slick and who knew how thin. To break through would mean
immersion in what was below: cold, dark anaerobic water
and angry, toothy fish. The fish were memories. He wanted
to put them away somewhere and forget where he’d put
them, but he couldn’t. The ice gave way at the oddest
moments: when a fluffy talking chipmunk looked up at him
quizzically, when a centaur nurse was inadvertently kind to
him, when he caught a glimpse of his face in a mirror.
Something hideous and saurian would rise up and his eyes
would flood and he would wrench himself away.
The grief he felt for Alice kept unfolding new dimensions
he hadn’t known were there. He felt like he’d only seen and
loved her, really loved her, all of her, for those last few
hours. Now she was gone, broken like the glass animal
she’d made that first day they’d met, and the rest of his life
lay in front of him like a barren, meaningless postscript.
For the first few weeks after his resurrection Quentin still
felt deep aches in his chest and shoulder, but they faded as
more weeks piled on top of those first few. He was at first
shocked and subsequently kind of fascinated to discover
that the centaurs had replaced the skin and muscle tissue
he’d lost to the Beast with something that looked very much
like dark fine-grained wood. Two-thirds of his collarbone,
and most of his right shoulder and biceps, now appeared tobe composed of a smooth, highly polished fruit-wood—
cherry maybe, or possibly apple. The new tissue was
completely numb—he could rap on it with his knuckles and
not feel a thing—but it was perfectly able to flex and bend
when and where he needed it to, and it merged gracefully
with the flesh around it, without a seam. He liked it.
Quentin’s right knee was wooden now, too. He couldn’t
actually remember having injured that particular part of him,
but whatever, maybe something untoward had happened to
it on the way back.
And there was another change: his hair had gone
completely white, even his eyebrows, like the man in Poe’s
“Descent into the Maelstrom.” He looked like he was
wearing an Andy Warhol wig.
He would do anything to keep from sitting still. He
practiced with a bow and arrow on a wide, disused, weed-
grown archery range. When he could get his attention, he
had one of the younger centaurs teach him the rudiments of
riding and fencing with a saber, in the name of physical
therapy. Sometimes he pretended his sparring partner was
Martin Chatwin, sometimes he didn’t; either way, he never
once landed a hit. A small contingent of talking animals had
discovered Quentin’s presence at the Retreat, a badger
and some oversize talking rabbits. Excited by the sight and
smell of a human, and from Earth at that, they had gotten it
into their heads that he was the next High King of Fillory,
and when he angrily insisted that he wasn’t, and that he’d
lost all interest in that particular ambition, they dubbed him
the Reluctant King and left tributes of nuts and cabbages
outside his windows, and constructed pathetic handmade
(or pawmade) crowns for him woven out of twigs and
adorned with worthless quartz pebbles. He tore them apart.
A small herd of tame horses roamed the wide lawns of
the Retreat at will. At first Quentin thought they were just
pets, but the arrangement turned out to be slightly more
complex than that. Centaurs of both sexes frequently
copulated with the horses, publicly and loudly.Quentin had found his few meager possessions stacked
in little piles along one wall of his room. He stowed them in
a dresser; they took up exactly half of one of its five
drawers. His room also held a battered old Florida-style
writing desk, painted white and pale green, and one day
Quen tin went rummaging through its warped, poorly fitted
drawers to see what previous inmates might have left
behind. It had occurred to him to attempt some written
magic, a basic scrying technique, to try to learn something
about what had happened to the others. It almost certainly
wouldn’t work between planes, but you never knew. Along
with an assortment of odd buttons and dried-out chestnuts
and exotic Fillorian insect corpses he found two envelopes.
Also in the desk was a dry, tough, leafy branch.
The envelopes were thick and made of the coarse
bleached-white paper the centaurs made. On the first his
name was written in an elegant calligraphic handwriting that
Quentin recognized as Eliot’s. His vision swam; he had to
sit down.
Inside it was a note. It was rolled around the flattened,
dehydrated remains of what was once a single Merit Ultra
Light cigarette, and it read as follows:
DEAR Q,
HELL OF A THING GETTING YOU OUT OF THAT
DUNGEON. RICHARD SHOWED UP, FINALLY,
FOR WHICH I SUPPOSE WE SHOULD BE
GRATEFUL, THOUGH G-D KNOWS HE
DOESN’T MAKE IT EASY.
WE WANTED TO STAY, Q, BUT IT WAS
HARD, AND GETTING HARDER EVERY DAY.
THE CENTAURS SAID IT WASN’T WORKING.
BUT IF YOU’RE READING THIS THEN YOU
WOKE UP AFTER ALL. I’M SORRY ABOUT
EVERYTHING. I KNOW YOU ARE TOO. I KNOW ISAID I DIDN’T NEED A FAMILY TO BECOME
WHO I WAS SUPPOSED TO BE, BUT IT
TURNED OUT THAT I DID. AND IT WAS YOU.
WE’LL MEET AGAIN.
-E
The other envelope contained a notebook. It was thick
and old-looking and squashed around the corners. Quentin
recognized it instantly, even though he hadn’t seen it since
a chilly November afternoon six years ago.
With a cold, clear mind he sat down on his bed and
opened The Magicians.
The book was disappointingly short, maybe fifty
handwritten pages, some of them smudged and water-
damaged, and it was not written in Christopher Plover’s
usual plain, simple, open-hearted prose. It was cruder,
funnier, more arch, and it showed signs of having been
scribbled in haste, with a generous assortment of
misspellings and missing words. This was because it
wasn’t written by Christopher Plover at all. It was—the
author explained in the first paragraph—the first book of
Fillory and Further by somebody who had actually been
there. That person was Jane Chatwin.
The story of The Magicians picked up immediately after
the end of The Wandering Dune, after Jane, the youngest,
and her sister Helen (“that dear, self-righteous busybody”)
quarreled over Helen’s hiding of the magic buttons that
could take them to Fillory. Having failed to unearth them
herself, Jane was forced to wait, but no further invitations to
Fillory arrived. She and her siblings seemed fated to live
out the rest of their lives on Earth as ordinary children. She
supposed it was all right—after all, most children never got
to go to Fillory at all—but it hardly seemed fair. The others
had all gone to Fillory at least twice, and she’d only gottento go once.
And there was the matter of Martin: he was still missing
after all this time. Their parents had long since given up
hope, but the children hadn’t. At night Jane and the other
little Chatwins crept into each other’s bedrooms and
whispered about him, wondering what adventures he was
getting up to in Fillory, and when he would finally come
home to them, as they knew he one day would.
Years passed. Jane was thirteen, no longer a girl, as old
as Martin was when he’d disappeared, when the call finally
came. She was visited by a cooperative and industrious
hedgehog named Prickleplump, who helped her recover an
old cigar box containing the buttons from the old dry well
down which Helen had dropped it. She could have enlisted
one of the others to come with her, but instead Jane
returned to Fillory alone, by way of the City, the only
Chatwin ever to enter the other world without a sibling to
keep her company.
She found Fillory beset by a powerful wind. It blew and
blew and never stopped blowing. At first it was amusing,
and everybody flew kites, and a craze for flowy clothing that
billowed out on the breeze swept through the royal court at
Whitespire. But over time the wind became relentless. The
birds were exhausted from struggling with it, and
everybody’s hair was getting tangled. The leaves were
being stripped from the forest, and the trees were
complaining. Even when you went inside and closed the
door you could still hear it groaning, and feel it blowing on
your face for hours afterward. Castle Whitespire’s wind-
powered clockwork heart threatened to spin out of control,
and had to be decoupled from its windmills and halted for
the first time in living memory.
A group of eagles and griffins and pegasi allowed
themselves to be borne away on the wind, convinced that it
would blow them away to a fantastical land, one even more
magical than Fillory. They returned a week later coming
from the other direction, hungry and disheveled andwindburned. They refused to discuss what they had seen.
Jane belted on a rapier, put her hair up in a tight bun, and
set off into the Darkling Woods alone, resolute, bent
forward against the gale, heading upwind in search of its
source. Soon she came across Ember, alone in a clearing.
He was injured and distraught. He told her of Martin’s
transformation, and his efforts to expel the child, which had
ended with the death of Umber. They held a council of war.
With a bellowing bleat Ember summoned the Cozy
Horse, and together they mounted its broad velvet back
and set off to see the dwarves. Swing players at the best of
times, the dwarves could never be relied upon to cooperate
with anybody, but even they were convinced that Martin was
dangerous, and besides, all that wind was blowing the
topsoil off their beloved underground warrens. They
fashioned for Jane a silver pocket watch, a work of
consummate horological mastery, so dense with tiny gears
and cams and glorious spiral springs that its interior was a
solid teeming mass of gleaming clockwork. With it, the
dwarves explained, Jane could control the flow of time itself
—turn it forward, turn it back, speed it up, slow it down—as
she liked.
Jane and Ember left with the pocket watch, shaking their
heads. Honestly, there was never any telling what the
dwarves were capable of. If they could build a time
machine, you wondered why they didn’t run the whole
kingdom. Except, she supposed, that they couldn’t be
bothered.
Quentin turned the last page. The book ended there. It
was signed on the bottom of the last page by Jane herself.
“Well, that was anticlimactic,” Quentin said out loud.
“The truth doesn’t always make a good story, does it?
But I think I tied up most of the loose threads. I’m sure you
can fill in the rest, if you really think about it.”
Quentin practically jumped out of what was left of his skin.Sitting on top of his desk on the other side of the room, very
still, long legs crossed, was a small, pretty woman with dark
hair and pale skin.
“At least I try to make a good entrance.”
She had gone native: she wore a light brown cloak over a
practical gray traveling dress that was slit up the sides far
enough to show some leg. But it was unmistakably her. The
paramedic, and the woman who’d visited him in the
infirmary. And yet that wasn’t who she was at all.
“You’re Jane Chatwin, aren’t you?”
She smiled brightly and nodded.
“I autographed it.” She pointed to the manuscript.
“Imagine what it would be worth. Sometimes I think about
turning up at a Fillory convention just to see what would
happen.”
“They’d probably think you were a cosplayer,” Quentin
said, “and getting a little old for it.”
He set aside the manuscript on the bed. He had been
very young when he met her for the first time, but he wasn’t
young anymore. As her brother Martin would have said: My,
how he’d grown. Her smile was not as irresistible as it used
to be.
“You were the Watcherwoman, too, weren’t you?”
“Was and am.” Still sitting, she sketched a curtsy. “I
suppose I could retire now that Martin is gone. Though
really, I’ve only just started to enjoy myself.”
He expected himself to smile back at her, but the smile
did not materialize. He didn’t feel like smiling. Quentin
couldn’t have said exactly what he was feeling.
Jane remained very still, studying him as she had that
first day they met. Her presence was so laden with magic
and meaning and history that she almost glowed. To think
she had spoken to Plover himself, and told him the storiesQuentin had grown up on. The circularity of it all was dizzy
ing. The sun was setting, and the light stained Quentin’s
white bedspread a dusky orange-pink. The edges of
everything were softening in the twilight.
“This doesn’t make any sense,” he said. He had never
felt less tempted by a pretty woman’s charms. “If you were
the Watcherwoman, why did you do all those things? Stop
time and all that?”
She smiled wryly.
“This item”—she produced a silver pocket watch as thick
and round as a pomegranate from somewhere in her cloak
—“did not come with an instruction manual. It took a bit of
experimenting before I got the hang of it, and some of those
experiments weren’t so successful. There was one long
afternoon in particular . . .” She grimaced. Her accent was
the twin of Martin’s. “People took it the wrong way. And
anyhow, Plover embroidered all that stuff. What an
imagination that man had.”
She shook her head, as if Plover’s flights of fancy were
the most incredible part of all this.
“And you know, I was only thirteen when I started out. I
had no training in magic at all. I had to figure everything out
on my own. I suppose I’m a bit of a hedge witch that way.”
“So all those things the Watcherwoman did—”
“A lot of it did actually happen. But I was careful. The
Watcherwoman never killed anyone. I cut corners,
sometimes at other people’s expense, but I had other
things on my mind. My job was to stop Martin, and I did
what I had to. Even those clock-trees.” She snorted ruefully.
“Brilliant idea those were. They never did a bloody thing.
The funniest part is that Martin was terrified of them! He
couldn’t figure them out.”
For a moment her face lost its composure, just for a
moment. Her eyes welled with tears, and she blinked
rapidly.“I keep telling myself that we lost him that first night, when
he walked away into the forest. It was never him after that,
not really. He died a long time ago. But I’m the only Chatwin
left now. He was a monster, but he was the last family I
had.”
“And we killed him,” Quentin said coldly. His heart was
palpitating. The feeling he’d had trouble identifying earlier
was clarifying itself: it was rage. This woman had used him,
used them all like toys. And if some of the toys got broken,
oh well. That had been the real point of the whole story all
along. She had manipulated him, sent him and the others
into Fillory to find Martin. She had made sure he got there.
For all he knew she’d planted the button for Lovelady to find
in the first place. It didn’t matter now. It was over, and Alice
was dead.
He stood up. A cool, grassy evening breeze stirred the
green curtains.
“Yes,” Jane Chatwin said carefully. “You killed him. We
won.”
“We won?” He was incredulous. He couldn’t hold back
anymore. All the grief and guilt he’d been salting away so
carefully was coming back to him as anger. The ice was
cracking. The pond was boiling. “We won? You have a
damn time machine in your pocket, and that’s the best you
could do? You set us up, Jane, or whoever the fuck you are.
We thought we were going on an adventure, and you sent
us on a suicide mission, and now my friends are dead.
Alice is dead.” Here he had to swallow hard before he
could go on. “Is that really the best you could do?”
She dropped her eyes to the floor. “I am sorry.”
“You’re sorry.” The woman was unbelievable. “Good.
Show me how sorry you are. Take me back. Use the watch,
we’ll go back in time. We’ll do it all again. Let’s go back
and fix this.”
“No, Quentin,” she said gravely. “We can’t go back.”“What do you mean, no? We can go back. We can and
we will!”
He was talking at her louder and louder, staring at her, as
if by talking and staring he could force her into doing what
he needed her to do. She had to! And if talking wouldn’t do
it, he could make her. She was a small woman, and apart
from that watch he was willing to bet that he was twice the
magician she’d ever be.
She was shaking her head sadly.
“You have to understand.” She didn’t back away. She
spoke softly, as if she could soothe him, placate him into
forgetting what she’d done. “I’m a witch, I’m not a god. I’ve
tried this so many ways. I’ve gone down so many different
timelines. I’ve sent so many other people to fight Martin.
Don’t make me lecture you on the practicalities of
chronological manipulation, Quentin. Change one variable
and you change them all. Did you think you were the first
one to face Martin in that room? Do you think that was even
the first time you faced him? That battle has been fought
again and again. I’ve tried it so many different ways.
Everyone always died. And I always wound back the clock.
“As bad as it was, as bad as it is, this is by far the best
outcome I’ve ever achieved. No one ever stopped him but
you and your friends, Quentin. You were the only ones. And
I’m sticking with it. I can’t risk losing everything we’ve
gained.”
Quentin folded his arms. Muscles were jumping in his
back. He was practically vibrating with fury. “Well, then.
We’ll go back all the way. To before The World in the
Walls. Stop him before it all starts. Find a timeline where
he doesn’t even go to Fillory.”
“I’ve tried, Quentin! I’ve tried!” She was pleading with
him. “He always does! I’ve tried it a thousand times. There
is no world where he doesn’t.
“I’m tired. I know you lost Alice. I lost my brother. I’m tiredof fighting that thing that used to be Martin.”
Suddenly she did look very tired, and her eyes lost their
focus, as if she were seeing into some other world, one she
would never get to. It made it hard for him keep up his high-
pressure rage. It kept bleeding away even as he stoked it.
This wasn’t over. He lunged, but she saw it coming. He
was quick, but she was quicker. Maybe they’d played this
scene already, in another timeline, or maybe he was just
that obvious. Before he was halfway across the room she
spun on her heel and threw the silver watch as hard as she
could at the wall.
It was hard enough. The wall was stone, and the watch
squashed like an overripe fruit. It made a sound like a bag
of nickels. The delicate crystal face shattered, and tiny
gears and wheels skittered away across the floor like
pearls from a broken necklace.
Jane turned back to him defiantly, breathing hard. He
stared down at the corpse of the broken timepiece.
“No more,” she said. “Put an end to it. It’s time to live with
what we have and mourn what we lost. I wish I could have
told you more before it was too late, but I needed you too
much to tell you the truth.”
In a curious gesture she placed her hands on his cheeks,
drew his face down to hers, and kissed him on the
forehead. The room was almost dark now. The door
creaked in the quiet spring evening as she opened it.
“Try not to judge Martin too harshly,” she said from the
doorway. “Plover used to diddle him whenever he could get
him alone. I think that’s why he went to Fillory in the first
place. Why else would he try to crawl into a grandfather
clock? He was looking for somewhere to hide.”
With that she was gone.
Quentin didn’t go after her, just stared at the doorway for
a long minute. When he walked over to the door to close it,pieces of the broken watch scrunched under his feet.
It just went down and down. Had he finally gotten to the
bottom of it? In the last of the dying light he looked down at
the notebook on the hard centaur bed. There was a note
tucked into the pages, the same one the wind had snatched
away from him the first time he tried to read it. But all it said
was:
SURPRISE!
He sat back down. In the end he and Alice had just been
bit players, extras who had the bad luck to wander into a
battle scene. A brother and sister at war with each other in
their nightmare nursery fantasyland. No one cared that
Alice was dead, and no one cared that he wasn’t.
Now he had answers, but they weren’t doing what
answers were supposed to do: they weren’t making things
simpler or easier. They weren’t helping. Sitting there on his
bed, he thought about Alice. And poor, stupid Penny, and
miserable Eliot. And that poor bastard Martin Chatwin. He
got it now, of course, finally. He’d been going about this all
wrong. He should never have come here at all. He should
never have fallen in love with Alice. He should never even
have come to Brakebills. He should have stayed in
Brooklyn, in the real world. He should have nursed his
depression and his grudge against the world from the
relative safety of mundane reality. He never would have met
Alice, but at least she would be alive, somewhere. He could
have eked out his sad wasted life with movies and books
and masturbation and alcohol like everybody else. He
would never have known the horror of really getting what he
thought he wanted. He could have spared himself and
everybody else the cost of it. If there was a moral to the
story of Martin Chatwin, that was it in a nutshell. Sure, you
can live out your dreams, but it’ll only turn you into a
monster. Better to stay home and do card tricks in your
bedroom instead.
It was partly Jane’s fault, of course. She had lured him onat every turn. Well, he wouldn’t get fooled again. He
wouldn’t give anybody the chance. Quentin felt a new
attitude of detachment descend on him. His molten anger
and grief were cooling into a glossy protective coating, a
hard transparent lacquer of uncaring. If he couldn’t go back,
he would just have to do things differently going forward. He
felt how infinitely safer and more sound this attitude was.
The trick was just not wanting anything. That was power.
That was courage: the courage not to love anyone or hope
for anything.
The funny thing about it was how easy everything got,
when nothing mattered. Over the next few weeks the new
Quentin, with his white Warhol hair and his wooden
Pinocchio shoulder, took up his magical studies again.
What was wanted now was control. He wanted to be
untouchable.
In his little cell Quentin practiced things he’d never had
time to master before, or never dared to try. He went back
to the most advanced Popper exercises—gruesomely
difficult, only theoretically executable etudes that he’d faked
his way through back at Brakebills. Now he repeated them
over and over again, smoothing out the rough edges. He
invented new, even crueler versions and mastered them as
well. He relished the pain in his hands, ate it up. His
enchantments took on a power and precision and fluency
they’d never had before. His fingertips left tracks of fire and
sparks and neon indigo smears in the air, that buzzed and
whined, too bright to look at directly. His brain glowed with
cold, brittle triumph. This was what Penny had been looking
for when he went to Maine, but Quentin was actually doing
it. Only now, he thought, now that he had killed off his human
emotions, only now that he didn’t care anymore, could he
wield truly superhuman power.
As the sweet spring air drifted through his room, and then
the oven-hot summer air, and sweat poured down his face,
and the centaurs trotted by outside his door, lofty and
incurious, he came to see how Mayakovsky had performed
some of the feats Quentin had found so baffling. In anempty meadow he carefully reverse-engineered Penny’s
flashy Fireball spell. He found and corrected the mistakes
he’d made in his senior project, the trip to the moon, and he
finished Alice’s project, too, in memoriam, isolating and
capturing a single photon and even observing it,
Heisenberg be damned: an infinitely furious, precious,
incandescent little wave-spark.
Seated in the lotus position on top of the sun-faded
Florida desk, he allowed his mind to expand until it
encompassed one, then three more, then six field mice in
all as they went about their tiny urgent business in the grass
outside his window. He summoned them to sit before him
and, with a thought, gently extinguished the electrical
current that lived within each of them. Their little fluffy bodies
went still and cold. Then, just as easily, he touched each of
them with magic, instantly relighting their tiny souls as if he
were touching a match to the pilot light of a stove.
Panicked, they scrambled in all directions. He let them
go. Alone in his room, he smiled at his secret greatness.
He felt lordly and munificent. He had tampered with the
sacred mystery of life and death. What else was there in
this world that could engage his attention? Or in any world?
June ripened into July, then burst and withered and dried
and became August. One morning Quentin woke up early
to find a cool mist hanging low over the lawn outside his
first-floor window. Standing there in plain view, looking
huge and ethereal, was a white stag. It bent to crop the
grass with its small mouth, tilting its grand, top-heavy rack
of antlers, and he could see the muscles working in its
neck. Its ears were bigger and flop-pier than he would have
expected. It raised its head again when Quentin appeared
in the window, conscious of being observed, then
sauntered off across the lawn and disappeared unhurriedly
from view. Frowning, Quen tin watched it go. He went back
to bed but couldn’t sleep.
Later in the day he sought out Alder Acorn Agnes Allison-
fragrant-timber. He found her working an elaborate, room-size loom built to harness both the pumping power of her
muscular back legs and the delicate manipulations of her
human fingers.
“The Questing Beast,” she said, breathing hard, still
pumping, her hands still weaving. “It is a rare sight.
Undoubtedly it was drawn here by the positive energies
radiated by our superior values. You are fortunate that it
offered itself to some centaur’s sight while you happened to
be watching.”
The Questing Beast. From The Girl Who Told Time. So
that was what it looked like. Somehow he’d expected
something more ferocious. Quentin patted Agnes on her
glossy black hindquarters and left. He knew what he had to
do.
That night he took out the leafy branch he had found in
the writing desk. It was the branch that had hung in front of
the Beast’s face, which it had tossed aside right before
their battle. The branch was dead and dried now, but its
leaves were still olive and rubbery. He stuck its hard stem in
the moist turf and mounded up some dirt to make sure it
stayed upright.
The next morning Quentin woke to find a fully grown tree
outside his window. Set into its trunk was the face of a
softly ticking clock.
He put his hand on the tree’s hard gray trunk, feeling its
cool, dusty bark, then let it drop. His time here was over. He
packed a few possessions, abandoned others, stole a bow
and a quiver of arrows from the shed by the archery range,
liberated a horse from the centaurs’ feral sex-herd, and left
the Retreat.THE WHITE STAG
The hunt for the Questing Beast took him to the edge of the
vast Northern Marsh, then back south, skirting the edge of
the Great Bramble, then north again, angling west through
the Darkling Woods as far as the vast, gently gurgling
expanse of the Lower Slosh. It was like visiting places he’d
seen in dreams. He drank from streams and slept on the
ground and ate fire-roasted game—he had become a
passable archer, and when he couldn’t hit something on his
own he used magic to cheat.
He rode his horse hard; she was a gentle bay who didn’t
seem very sorry to leave the centaurs behind. Quentin’s
mind was as empty of thoughts as the woods and fields
were of people. The pond in his head was frozen again, a
foot thick this time. On his best days he could go hours
without thinking about Alice.
If he thought of anything it was the white stag. He was on
a quest, but it was his quest now, nobody else’s. He
scanned the skyline for the prickle of its antlers and thickets
for the flash of its pale flank. He knew what he was doing.
This was what he’d dreamed about all the way back in
Brooklyn. This was the primal fantasy. When he had
finished it, he could close the book for good.
The Questing Beast led him even farther west, through
the hills of the Chankly Bore, over a pass in a bitterly sharp
mountain range, beyond anything he recognized or had
ever heard of from the Fillory books. He was in virgin
territory now, but he didn’t stop to explore, or name the
peaks. He descended a blazing white chalk cliff to a strip of
volcanic black sand on the shore of a great, undiscovered
western sea. When it spotted him still in pursuit, the stag
bounded out onto the surf as if it were dry land. It leaped
from breaker to breaker and swell to swell, like it was
jumping from crag to crag, antlers erect, shaking its head
and snuffing sea foam from its nostrils.Quentin sighed. The next day he sold the gentle bay and
booked passage across the western sea.
He managed to hire a nimble sloop named,
embarrassingly enough, the Skywalker, crewed by an
efficient foursome of three taciturn brothers and their burly,
suntanned sister. Without speaking they swarmed through
Skywalker ’s fiendishly idiosyncratic rigging, which
consisted of two dozen small lateen sails that required
constant minor adjustments. They were awed by his
wooden prosthetics. Two weeks out they put in at a jolly
tropical archipelago—a sun-drenched scatter pattern of
mango swamps and sheep meadows—to take on fresh
water, then they pushed on.
They passed an island inhabited by angry, bloodthirsty
giraffes, and a floating beast that offered them an extra
year of life in exchange for a finger (the sister took the
beast up on it, times three). They passed an ornate wooden
staircase that spiraled down into the ocean, and a young
woman adrift on an open book the size of a small island, in
which she scribbled tirelessly. None of these adventures
inspired in Quentin anything resembling wonder or
curiosity. All that was over for him.
Five weeks out they made landfall on a scorched black
rock, and the crew threatened to mutiny if they didn’t turn
back. Quentin stared them down, then bluffed about his
magical powers, then finally quintupled their pay. They
sailed on.
Being brave was easy when you would rather die than
give up. Fatigue meant nothing when you actually wanted to
suffer. Before this Quentin had never been on a sailboat big
enough to have a jib, but now he was as lean and brown
and salty-skinned as his crew. The sun became huge, and
the seawater grew hot against the Skywalker ’s gunwales.
Everything felt electrically charged. Ordinary objects gave
off strange optical effects, flares and sunspots and
coronas. The stars were low, burning orbs, visibly spherical,
pregnant with illegible meaning. A powerful golden lightshone through everything, as if the world were only a thin
scrim behind which a magnificent sun was shining. The
stag kept bounding on ahead of them.
At last an unknown continent filled the horizon. It was
wrapped in a magical winter and thickly wooded with fir
trees that grew right up to the shore, so that the salt water
lapped at their tangled roots. Quentin dropped anchor and
told the crew, who were shivering in their thin tropical
clothes, to wait a week and then leave without him if he
wasn’t back. He gave them the rest of the gold he’d
brought, kissed the seven-fingered sister goodbye, lowered
the sloop’s caïque, and rowed himself to shore. Strapping
his bow to his back, he pushed his way into the snow-
choked forest. It was good to be alone again.
The Questing Beast showed itself on the third night.
Quentin had made camp on a low bluff overlooking a clear,
spring-fed pool. Just before dawn he woke to find it
standing at the water’s edge. Its reflection shivered as it
lapped the cold water. He waited for a minute, on one knee.
This was it. He strung his bow and slipped an arrow from
his quiver. Looking down from the low bluff, with the early-
morning air almost dead, it wasn’t even a difficult shot. At
the moment of release he thought: I’m doing what even the
Chatwins failed to do, Helen and Rupert. He didn’t feel the
pleasure he thought he would. He put his shaft through the
tough meat of the white stag’s muscular right thigh.
He winced. Thank God he hadn’t hit an artery. It didn’t try
to flee, just sat stiffly on its haunches like an injured cat. He
had the impression, from its resigned expression, that the
Questing Beast had to go through this kind of thing once a
century or so. The cost of doing business. Its blood looked
black in the pre-dawn twilight.
It showed no fear as Quentin approached. It reached
back with its supple neck and grasped the arrow firmly in its
square white teeth. With a jerk the shaft came free. It spat
out the arrow at Quentin’s feet.
“Hurts, that,” the Questing Beast said matter-of-factly.It had been three days since Quentin had spoken to
anybody.
“What now,” he said hoarsely.
“Wishes, of course. You get three.”
“My friend Penny lost his hands. Fix them.”
The stag’s eyes defocused momentarily in thought.
“I cannot. I am sorry. He is either dead or not in this
world.”
The sun was just beginning to come up over the dark,
massed fir forest. Quentin took a deep breath. The cold air
smelled fresh and turpentiney.
“Alice. She turned into some kind of spirit. A niffin . Bring
her back.”
“Again I cannot.”
“What do you mean you can’t? It’s a wish.”
“I don’t make the rules,” the Questing Beast said. It
lapped at the blood that still trickled down its thigh. “You
don’t like it, find some other magic stag and shoot it
instead.”
“I wish that the rules were different.”
The stag rolled its eyes. “No. And I’m counting those
three together as your first wish. What’s number two?”
Quentin sighed. He hadn’t really allowed himself to hope.
“Pay off my crew. Double what I promised them.”
“Done,” the Questing Beast replied.
“That’s ten times their base salary, since I already
quintupled it.”
“I said ‘done,’ didn’t I? What’s number three?”
Years ago Quentin had worked out exactly what he wouldwish for if anybody ever gave him the chance. He would
wish to travel to Fillory and to be allowed to stay there
forever. But that was years ago.
“Send me home,” he said.
The Questing Beast closed its round brown eyes gravely,
then opened them. It dipped its antlers toward him.
“Done,” it said.
Quentin supposed he could have been more specific. By
rights the Questing Beast could have sent him back to
Brooklyn, or to his parents’ house in Chesterton, or to
Brakebills, or even to the house upstate. But the stag went
the literal way with it, and Quentin wound up in front of his
last semiper manent residence, the apartment building in
Tribeca that he’d shared with Alice. Nobody noticed as he
abruptly came into being in the middle of the sidewalk in
the late morning of what appeared to be an early-summer
day. He walked away quickly. He couldn’t even look at their
old doorway. He left his bow and arrows in a trash can.
It was a shock to suddenly be surrounded by so many of
his fellow human beings again at such close quarters. Their
mottled skins and flawed physiognomies and preening
vanities were less easy to ignore. Maybe some of that
centaur snobbery had rubbed off on him. A revolting stew of
fragrances both organic and inorganic invaded his nose.
The front page of a newspaper, acquired at the corner deli,
informed him that he’d been gone from Earth for a little over
two years.
He would have to call his parents. Fogg would have kept
them from fretting too much, but still. It almost made him
smile to think of seeing them now. What the hell would they
say about his hair? Soon, but not yet. He walked around,
getting reacclimated. The spells involved in retrieving cash
from an ATM were child’s play now. He got a shave and ahaircut and bought some clothes that weren’t made by
centaurs and hence didn’t look like a Renaissance Faire
costume. He babied himself. He had lunch at a fancy
steakhouse and nearly died with pleasure. By three o’clock
he was drinking Moscow Mules in a long, dark, empty
basement bar in Chinatown where he used to go with the
Physical Kids.
It had been a long time since he’d drunk alcohol. It had a
dangerous thawing effect on his frozen brain. The ice that
kept his feelings of guilt and sorrow under control creaked
and groaned. But he kept on with it, and soon a deep, pure,
luxurious sadness came over him, as heady and decadent
as a drug. The place started filling up at five. By six the
after-work drinkers were jostling Quentin at the bar. He
could see that the light falling down the stairs out front had
changed. He was on his way out when he noticed a
slender, pretty girl with blond curls nuzzling a man who
looked like an underwear model in a corner booth. Quentin
didn’t know the underwear model from Adam, but the pretty
girl was definitely Anaïs.
It wasn’t the reunion he would have wanted, nor was she
the person he would have chosen to reunite with. But
maybe it was better this way, with somebody he didn’t care
too much about, who didn’t care too much about him,
either. And he had those trusty Moscow Mules to carry
some of the load for him. Baby steps. They sat outside on
the stairway. She put her hand on his arm and goggled at
his white hair.
“You would not have believed eet, ” she said. Oddly, her
pan-European accent had deepened and her English
grammar worsened since he’d seen her last. Possibly it
played better in the bar scene. “The time we ’ad getting out.
It was quiet for a while, and then they rush us again. Josh
was very good, you know. Very good. I had never seen him
work magic like that. There was a thing that swam in the
floor, under the stones—like a shark, I think, but it swam in
the stones. It got hold of your leg.”“That might explain this,” Quentin said. He showed her
his wooden knee, and she goggled all over again. The
alcohol was making all this much easier than expected. He
was braced for a torrent of emotion, a cavalry charge of
grief on his defenseless peace of mind, but if it was coming
it hadn’t yet.
“And there was a thing—a spell in the walls, I think—so
that we went around in circles. We ended up in Amber’s
room again.”
“Ember’s.”
“What did I say? Anyhow we ’ad to break the spell—”
She stopped to wave through the window at her buff
boyfriend in the bar. She sounded as if she’d told this story
many times already, to the point where she was quite bored
of it. For her it all happened two years ago, to people she’d
barely known anyway. “And we carried you the whole way.
My God. I don’t think we would have made it if Richard”—
ree-SHARD—“ ’adn’t found us.
“It almost makes you like him, you know? He had a way
of making us invisible to the monsters. He practically
carried us out of that place. Still I have a scar.”
She flounced up the hem of her skirt, which was none too
long to begin with. A thick, bumpy keloid strip six inches
long stood out from her smooth, tanned thigh.
Amazingly, Penny had survived, she told him, or at least
he had for a while. The centaurs were unable to reconstruct
his hands, and without them he could no longer cast spells.
When they reached the Neitherlands Penny walked away
from the rest of the party, as if he were searching for
something. When he came to a tall, narrow stone palazzo,
unusually old and worn, he stopped in front of it and spread
out his handless arms as if in supplication. After a minute
the doors of the palazzo opened. The others caught a
glimpse of ranks of bookcases—the warm, secret paper
heart of the City. Penny stepped inside and the doors
closed behind him.“Can you believe it even all happened?” she kept saying.
“It is like a cauchemar . But it is all over now.”
It was strange: Anaïs didn’t seem to blame him, or
herself. She had found some way of mourning what had
happened. Or maybe it hadn’t touched her to begin with. It
was hard to guess what went on under those blond curls.
Throughout the story she kept looking over his shoulder
at the underwear model, and after a while he took pity on
her and let her go. They said goodbye—kiss, kiss. Neither
party promised to keep in touch. What was the point of lying
now, at this late stage in the game? Like she said, it was all
over now. He stayed sitting outside on the steps, in the
warm early hours of the summer evening, until it crossed his
mind how much he didn’t want to run into Anaïs again on
her way out.
It was getting dark, and he would need somewhere to
sleep tonight. He could find a hotel, but why bother? And
why wait? He had abandoned almost everything he owned
back in Fillory, but one thing Quentin had hung on to was
the iron key Fogg had given him when he graduated. It
hadn’t worked from Fillory—he’d tried—but now, standing
by himself on a trash-littered street in Tribeca, breathing the
soupy, sun-warmed city air, he took it out of the pocket of
his brand-new jeans. It felt reassuringly hefty. On a hunch he
held it up to his ear. It gave off a high, constant musical
ringing tone, like a struck tuning fork. He’d never noticed
that before.
Feeling grandly lonely, and only a little frightened, he
gripped the key with both hands, closed his eyes, relaxed,
and let it tug him forward. It was like riding the rope tow at a
ski slope. The key parted an invisible seam in the air and
drew him swiftly forward and with a delightful sense of
acceleration through some highly convenient sub-
dimension back to the stone terrace out behind the house
at Brakebills. The pain of going back was great, but the
necessity was greater. He had one last piece of business
to take care of, and then it really would all be over forever.KINGS AND QUEENS
As the junior member of the PlaxCo account team,
associate management consultant Quentin Coldwater had
few actual responsibilities beyond attending the occasional
meeting and being civil to whatever colleagues he
happened to bump into in the elevator. On the rare
occasions when actual documents managed to make their
way into his in-box or onto his desk, he rubber-stamped
them (Looks good to me!!!—QC) without reading them and
sent them on their way.
Quentin’s desk was, as it happened, unusually large for a
new hire at his level, especially one as youthful as he
appeared to be (though his startling white hair lent him a
certain gravitas beyond his years), and whose educational
background and previous work history were on the sketchy
side. He just appeared one day, took possession of a
corner office recently vacated by a vice president three
times his age, and started drawing a salary and piling up
money in his 401(k) and receiving medical and dental
benefits and taking six weeks of vacation a year. In return
for which he didn’t seem to do much of anything beyond
play computer games on the ultra-flat double-wide-screen
monitor the outgoing veep had left behind.
But Quentin didn’t inspire any resentment in his new
colleagues, or even any particular curiosity. Everybody
thought somebody else knew the story on him, and if it
turned out that they didn’t, they definitely knew for a fact that
somebody over in HR had the scoop. And anyway,
supposedly he’d been a superstar at some high-flying
European school, fluent in all kinds of languages. Math
scores through the roof. The firm was lucky to have him.
Lucky.
And he was affable enough, if a little mopey. He seemed
smart. Or at least he looked smart. And anyway, he was a
member of the PlaxCo account team, and here at theconsulting firm of Grunnings Hunsucker Swann everybody
was a team player.
Dean Fogg had advised Quentin against it. He should
take more time, think it over, maybe get some therapy. But
Quentin had taken enough time. He had seen enough of the
magical world to last him the rest of his life, and he was
erecting a barrier between himself and it that no magic
could breach. He was going to cut it off and kill it dead.
Fogg had been right after all, even if he didn’t have the guts
to make good on his own argument: people were better off
without magic, living in the real world, learning to deal with it
as it came. Maybe there were people out there who could
handle the power a magician could wield, who deserved it,
but Quentin wasn’t one of them. It was time he grew up and
faced that fact.
So Fogg set him up with a desk job at a firm with large
amounts of magician money invested in it, and Quentin
took the subway and rode the elevator and ordered in lunch
like the rest of humanity, or at any rate the most privileged
0.1 percent of it. His curiosity about the realms invisible had
been more than satisfied, thanks tremendously much. At
least his parents were pleased. It was a relief to be able to
tell them what he did for a living and not lie.
Grunnings Hunsucker Swann was absolutely everything
Quentin had hoped it would be, which was as close to
nothing at all as he could get and still be alive. His office
was calm and quiet, with climate control and tinted floor-to-
ceiling windows. Office supplies were abundant and top-
notch. He was given all the balance sheets and org charts
and business plans to review that he could possibly have
wanted. To be honest, Quentin felt superior to anybody who
still messed around with magic. They could delude
themselves if they liked, those self-indulgent magical
mandarins, but he’d outgrown that stuff. He wasn’t a
magician anymore, he was a man, and a man took
responsibility for his actions. He was out here working the
hard flinty bedrock face of it all. Fillory? He’d been there
and done that, and it hadn’t done him or anybody else anygood. He was damn lucky he got out alive.
Every morning Quentin put on a suit and stood on an old
elevated subway platform in Brooklyn, raw cement stained
with rust by the bits of iron rebar poking out of it. From the
uptown end he could just barely see the tiny, hazy,
aeruginous spike of the Statue of Liberty out in the bay. In
the summertime the thick wooden ties sweated aromatic
beads of liquid black tar. Invisible signals caused the tracks
to shift and shunt the trains left and right, as if (as if, but not
actually) directed by unseen hands. Nearby unidentifiable
birds swirled in endless cyclonic circles above a poorly
maintained dumpster.
Every morning when the train arrived it was full of young
Russian women riding in from Brighton Beach, three-
quarters asleep, swaying in unison to the rocking of the car,
their lustrous dark hair dyed a hideous unconvincing blond.
In the marble lobby of the building where Quentin worked,
elevators ingested pods of commuters and then spat them
out on their respective floors.
When he left work every day at five, the entire sequence
repeated itself in reverse.
As for his weekends, there was no end to the multifarious
meaningless entertainments and distractions with which the
real world supplied Quen tin. Video games; Internet porn;
people talking on their cell phones in bodegas about their
stepmothers’ medical conditions; weightless supermarket
plastic bags snagged in leafless trees; old men sitting on
their stoops with no shirts on; the oversize windshield
wipers on blue-and-white city buses slinging huge gouts of
rainwater back and forth, back and forth, back and forth.
It was all he had left, and it would have to be enough. As
a magician he had been among the world’s silent royalty,
but he had abdicated his throne. He had doffed his crown
and left it lying there for the next sucker to put on. Le roi est
mort . It was a kind of enchantment in itself, this new life of
his, the ultimate enchantment: the enchantment to end allenchantments forever.
One day, having leveled up three different characters in
three different computer games, and run through every Web
site he could plausibly and even implausibly want to surf,
Quentin noticed that his Outlook calendar was telling him
that he was supposed to be at a meeting. It had started half
an hour ago, and it was on a fairly remote floor of GHS’s
corporate monolith, necessitating the use of a different
elevator bank. But throwing caution to the wind he decided
to attend.
The purpose of this particular meeting, Quentin gathered
from some hastily harvested context clues, was a joint post-
mortem of the PlaxCo restructuring, which had apparently
been triumphantly wrapped up some weeks earlier, though
Quentin had somehow missed that crucial detail till now.
Also on the agenda was a new, related project, just kicking
off, to be conducted by another team consisting of people
Quentin had never met before. He found himself sneaking
glances at one of them.
It was hard to say what stood out about her, except that
she was the only person besides Quentin who never spoke
once during the entire meeting. She was some years older
than him and not notably attractive or unattractive. Sharp
nose, thin mouth, chin-length mousy brown hair, with an air
of powerful intelligence held in check by boredom. He
wasn’t sure how he knew, maybe it was her fingers, which
had a familiar muscular, overdeveloped look. Maybe it was
her features, which had a mask-like quality. But there was
no question what she was. She was another one like him: a
former Brakebillian in deep cover in the real world.
The thick plottens.
Quentin buttonholed a colleague afterward—Dan, Don,
Dean, one of those—and found out her name. It was Emily
Greenstreet. The one and only and infamous. The girlAlice’s brother had died for.
Quentin’s hands shook as he pressed the elevator
buttons. He informed his assistant that he would be taking
the rest of the afternoon off. Maybe the rest of the week,
too.
But it was too late. Emily Greenstreet must have spotted
him, too—maybe it really was the fingers?—because
before the day was over he had an e-mail from her. The
next morning she left him a voice mail and attempted to
remotely insert a lunch date into his Outlook calendar.
When he got online she IMed him relentlessly and finally—
having gotten his cell phone number off the company’s
emergency contact list—she texted him:
Y POSTPONE THE INEVITABLE?
Y not? he thought. But he knew she was right. He didn’t
really have a choice. If she wanted to find him, then sooner
or later she would. With a sense of defeat he clicked
ACCEPT on the lunch invitation. They met the following
week at a grandly expensive old-school French restaurant
that had been beloved of GHS executives since time
immemorial.
It wasn’t as bad as he thought. She was a fast-talking
woman, so skinny and with such erect posture that she
looked brittle. Seated across from each other, almost alone
in a hushed circle of cream tablecloths and glassware and
heavy, clinking silverware, they gossiped about work. He
hardly knew enough of the names to keep up, but she
talked enough for both of them. She told him about her life
—nice apartment, Upper East Side, roof deck, cats. They
found that they had a funny kind of black humor in common.
In different ways they had both discovered the same truth:
that to live out childhood fantasies as a grown-up was to
court and wed and bed disaster. Who could possibly know
that better than they—the man who watched Alice die, and
the woman who’d essentially killed Alice’s brother? Whenhe looked at her he saw himself eight years down the line. It
didn’t look all that bad.
And she liked a drink or five, so they had that in common,
too. Martini glasses, wine bottles, and whiskey tumblers
piled up between them, a miniature metropolis of
varicolored glass, while their cell phones and BlackBerries
plaintively, futilely tried to attract their attention.
“So tell me,” Emily Greenstreet said, when they’d both
imbibed enough to create the illusion of a comfortable,
long-standing intimacy between them. “Do you miss it?
Doing magic?”
“I can honestly say I never think about it,” he said. “Why?
Do you?”
“Miss it, or think about it?” She rolled a lock of her mousy,
chin-length hair between two fingers. “Of course I do. Both.”
“Are you ever sorry you left Brakebills?”
She shook her head sharply.
“The only thing I regret is not leaving that place sooner.”
She leaned forward, suddenly animated. “Just thinking
about that place now gives me the howling fantods. They’re
just kids, Quentin! With all that power! What happened to
Charlie and me could happen again to any one of them, any
day, any minute. Or worse. Much worse. It’s amazing that
place is still standing.” He noticed that she never said
“Brakebills,” just “that place.” “I don’t even like living on the
same coast with it. There’s practically no safeguards at all.
Every one of those kids is a nuclear bomb waiting to go off!
“Somebody needs to get control of that place.
Sometimes I think I should blow their cover, get the real
government in there, get it properly regulated. The teachers
will never do it. The Magician’s Court will never do it.”
She chattered on in that vein. They were like two
recovering alcoholics, hopped up on caffeine and Twelve
Step gospel, telling each other how glad they were to besober and then talking about nothing but drinking.
Though unlike recovering alcoholics they could and did
drink plenty of alcohol. Temporarily revived by a molten
affogato , Quentin went to work on a bitter single malt
Scotch that tasted like it had been decanted through the
stump of an oak tree that had been killed by lightning.
“I never felt safe in that place. Never, not for a minute.
Don’t you feel safer out here, Quentin? In the real world?”
“If you want to know the truth, these days I don’t feel much
of anything.”
She frowned at that. “Really. Then what made you give it
all up, Quen tin? You must have had a good reason.”
“I would say
unimpeachable.”
my
motives
were
pretty
much
“That bad?” She raised her thin eyebrows, flirtatiously.
“Tell me.”
She sat back and let the restaurant’s fancy easy chair
embrace her. Nothing a recovering addict likes more than a
tale of how bad it had been in the old days, and how low a
fellow addict had sunk. Let the one-downsmanship begin.
He told her just how low he’d sunk. He told her about
Alice, and their life together, and what they had done, and
how she had died. When he revealed the specifics of
Alice’s fate, Emily’s smile vanished, and she took a shaky
slurp from her martini glass. After all, Charlie had become a
niffin , too. The irony was quite comprehensively hideous.
But she didn’t ask him to stop.
When he was finished, he expected her to hate him as
much as he hated himself. As much, perhaps, as Quentin
suspected she hated herself. But instead her eyes were
brimming over with kindness.
“Oh, Quentin,” she said, and she actually took his hand
across the table. “You can’t blame yourself, truly you can’t.”
Her stiff, narrow face shone with pity. “You need to see thatall this evil, all this sadness, it all comes from magic. It’s
where all your trouble began. Nobody can be touched by
that much power without being corrupted. It’s what
corrupted me, Quen tin, before I gave it up. It’s the hardest
thing I ever did.”
Her voice softened.
“It’s what killed Charlie,” she said quietly. “And it killed
your poor Alice, too. Sooner or later magic always leads to
evil. Once you see that then you’ll see how to forgive
yourself. It will get easier. I promise you.”
Her pity was like a salve for his raw, chafed heart, and he
wanted to accept it. She was offering it to him, it was right
there across the table. All he had to do was reach out for it.
The check arrived, and Quentin charged the
astronomical sum to his corporate card. In the restaurant’s
foyer they were both so drunk that they had to help each
other into their raincoats—it had been pissing rain all day.
There was no question of going back to the office. He was
in no shape for that, and anyway it was already getting
dark. It had been a very long lunch.
Outside under the awning they hesitated. For a moment
Emily Greenstreet’s funny, flat mouth came unexpectedly
close to his.
“Have dinner with me tonight.” Her gaze was disarmingly
direct. “Come to my apartment. I’ll cook for you.”
“Can’t do it tonight,” he said blurrily. “I’m sorry. Next time
maybe.”
She put a hand on his arm. “Listen, Quentin. I know you
think you’re not ready for this—”
“I know I’m not ready.”
“—but you’ll never be ready. Not until you decide to be.”
She squeezed his forearm. “Enough drama, Quentin. Let
me help you. It’s not the worst thing in the world, admitting
you need help. Is it?”Her kindness was the most touching thing he’d seen
since he left Brakebills. And he hadn’t had sex, good God,
since the time he’d slept with Janet. It would be so easy to
go with her.
But he didn’t. Even as they stood there he felt something
tingle in his fingertips, under his fingernails, some residue
left by the thousands of spells that had flowed through them
over the years. He could still feel them there, the hot white
sparks that had once come streaming so freely from his
hands. She was wrong: blaming magic for Alice’s death
wasn’t going to help him. It was too easy, and he’d had
enough of doing things the easy way. It was all well and
good for Emily Greenstreet to forgive him, but people were
responsible for Alice’s death. Jane Chatwin was, and
Quentin was, and so was Alice herself. And people would
have to atone for it.
In that instant he looked at Emily Greenstreet and saw a
lost soul, alone in a howling wasteland, not so different from
the way her one-time lover Professor Mayakovsky had
looked standing alone at the South Pole. He wasn’t ready
to join her there. But where else could he go? What would
Alice have done?
Another month went by, and it was November, and Quentin
was sitting in his corner office staring out the window. The
building across the street was considerably shorter than the
Grunnings Hunsucker Swann building, so he had a clear
view of its rooftop, which consisted of a neat beige gravel
walkway running around a gray grid of massive,
complicated air-conditioning and heating units. With the
coming of the bitter late fall weather the air-conditioning
had gone silent and the heaters had sprung into life, and
huge nebulae of steam curled off them in abstract whorls:
hypnotic, silent, slowly turning shapes that never stopped
and never repeated themselves. Smoke signals sent by noone, to no one, signifying nothing. Lately Quentin spent a lot
of time watching them. His assistant had quietly given up
attempting to schedule appointments for him.
All at once, and with no warning, the tinted floor-to-ceiling
window that made up one entire wall of Quentin’s office
shattered and burst inward. Quentin’s ultra-modern, narrow-
wale Venetian blinds went crazily askew. Cold air and raw
unfiltered sunlight came flooding in. Something small,
round, and very heavy rolled across the carpet and bumped
into his shoe.
He looked down at it. It was a bluish marble sphere: the
stone globe they used to use to start a welters match.
Three people were floating in midair outside his window,
thirty stories up.
Janet looked older somehow, which of course she was,
but there was something else different about her. Her eyes,
the irises, radiated a seething violet mystical energy like
nothing Quentin had ever seen before. She wore a tight
black leather bustier that she was in imminent danger of
spilling out of. Silver stars were falling all around her.
Eliot had acquired a pair of immense white feathery
wings somewhere that spread out behind him, with which
he hovered on an intangible wind. On his head was the
golden crown of Fillory that Quentin had last seen in
Ember’s underground chamber. Between Janet and Eliot,
her arms wrapped in black silk, floated a tall, painfully
skinny woman with long wavy black hair that undulated in
the air as if she were underwater.
“Hello, Quentin,” Eliot said.
“Hi,” Janet said.
The other woman didn’t say anything. Neither did
Quentin.
“We’re going back to Fillory,” Janet said, “and we need
another king. Two kings, two queens.”“You can’t hide forever, Quentin. Come with us.”
With the tinted window gone and the afternoon sunlight
pouring into his office, Quentin couldn’t read his monitor
anymore. The climate control was howling trying to fight off
the cold air. Somewhere in the building an alarm went off.
“It could work this time,” Eliot said. “With Martin gone.
And besides, we never figured out what your Discipline
was. Doesn’t that bother you?”
Quentin stared at them. It was a few seconds before he
found his voice.
“What about Josh?” he croaked. “Go ask him.”
“He’s got another project.” Janet rolled her eyes. “He
thinks he can use the Neitherlands to get to Middle-earth.
He honestly believes he’s going to bone an elf.”
“I thought about being a queen,” Eliot added. “Turns out
they’re very open-minded about that kind of thing in Fillory.
But at the end of the day rules is rules.”
Quentin put down his coffee. It had been a long time
since he’d experienced any emotion at all other than
sadness and shame and numbness, so long that for a
moment he didn’t understand what was happening inside
him. In spite of himself he felt sensation coming back to
some part of him that he’d thought was dead forever. It hurt.
But at the same time he wanted more of it.
“Why are you doing this?” Quentin asked slowly, carefully.
He needed to be clear. “After what happened to Alice?
Why would you go back there? And why would you want me
with you? You’re only going to make it worse.”
“What, worse than this?” Eliot asked. He tilted his chin to
indicate Quentin’s office.
“We all knew what we were doing,” Janet said. “You
knew it, we knew it. Alice certainly knew it. We made our
choices, Q. And what’s going to happen? Your hair’s
already white. You can’t look any weirder than you alreadydo.”
Quentin swiveled around to face them in his ergonomic
desk chair. His heart felt like it was burning with relief and
regret, the emotions melting and running together and
turning into bright, hot, white light.
“The thing is,” he said. “I’d hate to cut out right before
bonus season.”
“Come on, Quentin. It’s over. You’ve done your time.”
Janet’s smile had a warmth in it that he’d never seen
before, or maybe he’d just never noticed it. “Everybody’s
forgiven you but you. And you are so far behind us.”
“You might be surprised about that.”
Quentin picked up the blue stone ball and studied it.
“So,” he said, “I’m gone for five minutes and you have to
bring in a hedge witch?”
Eliot shrugged.
“She’s got chops.”
“Fuck you,” said Julia.
Quentin sighed. He unkinked his neck and stood up.
“Did you really have to break my window?”
“No,” Eliot said. “Not really.”
Quentin walked to the floor’s edge. Sprays of smashed
window glass crunched on the carpet under his fancy
leather shoes. He ducked under the broken blinds. It was a
long way down. He hadn’t done this for a while.
Loosening his tie with one hand, Quentin stepped out
into the cold clear winter air and flew.
