Where you're supposed to be is some big West Hills
wedding reception in a big manor house with flower
arrangements and stuffed mushrooms all over the house. This
is called scene setting: where everybody is, who's alive, who's
dead. This is Evie Cottrell's big wedding reception moment.
Evie is standing halfway down the big staircase in the manor
house foyer, naked inside what's left of her wedding dress,
still holding her rifle.
Me, I'm standing at the bottom of the stairs but only in a
physical way. My mind is, I don't know where.
Nobody's all-the-way dead yet, but let's just say the clock
is ticking.
Not that anybody in this big drama is a real alive per-son,
either. You can trace everything about Evie Cottrell's look back
to some television commercial for an organic shampoo, except
right now Evie's wedding dress is burned down to just the
hoopskirt wires orbiting her hips and just the little wire
skeletons of all the silk flowers that were in her hair. And
Evie's blonde hair, her big, teased-up, backcombed rainbow in
every shade of blonde blown up with hairspray, well, Evie's

hair is burned off, too.
The only other character here is Brandy Alexander, who's
laid out, shotgunned, at the bottom of the staircase, bleeding
to death.
What I tell myself is the gush of red pumping out of
Brandy's bullet hole is less like blood than it's some
sociopolitical tool. The thing about being cloned from all
those shampoo commercials, well, that goes for me and
Brandy Alexander, too. Shotgunning anybody in this room
would be the moral equivalent of killing a car, a vacuum
cleaner, a Barbie doll. Erasing a computer disk. Burning a
book. Probably that goes for killing anybody in the world.
We're all such products.
Brandy Alexander, the long-stemmed latte queen
supreme of the top-drawer party girls, Brandy is gushing her
insides out through a bullet hole in her amazing suit jacket.
The suit, it's this white Bob Mackie knock-off Brandy bought
in Seattle with a tight hobble skirt that squeezes her ass into
the perfect big heart shape. You would not believe how
much this suit cost. The mark-up is about a zillion percent. The
suit jacket has a little peplum
skirt and wide lapels and shoulders. The single-breasted
cut is symmetrical except for the hole pumping out blood.
Then Evie starts to sob, standing there halfway up the
staircase. Evie, that deadly virus of the moment. This is our
cue to all look at poor Evie, poor, sad Evie, hairless and wearing

nothing but ashes and circled by the wire cage of her burned-
up hoop skirt. Then Evie drops the rifle. With her dirty face in

her dirty hands, Evie sits down and starts to boo-hoo, as if

crying will solve anything. The rifle, this is a loaded thirty-
aught rifle, it clatters down the stairs and skids out into the

middle of the foyer floor, spinning on its side, pointing at me,
pointing at Brandy, pointing at Evie, crying.

It's not that I'm some detached lab animal just condi-
tioned to ignore violence, but my first instinct is maybe it's

not too late to dab club soda on the bloodstain.
Most of my adult life so far has been me standing on
seamless paper for a raft of bucks per hour, wearing clothes
and shoes, my hair done and some famous fashion
photographer telling me how to feel.
Him yelling, Give me lust, baby.
Flash.
Give me malice.
Flash.
Give me detached existentialist ennui.
Flash.
Give me rampant intellectualism as a coping mechanism.
Flash.
Probably it's the shock of seeing my one worst enemy shoot
my other worst enemy is what it is. Boom, and it's a win-win
situation. This and being around Brandy, I've developed a
pretty big Jones for drama.
It only looks like I'm crying when I put a handkerchief up
under my veil to breathe through. To filter the air since you
can about not breathe for all the smoke since Evie's big
manor house is burning down around us.
Me, kneeling down beside Brandy, I could put my hands

anywhere in my gown and find Darvons and Demerols and
Darvocet 100s. This is everybody's cue to look at me. My gown
is a knock-off print of the Shroud of Turin, most of it brown
and white, draped and cut so the shiny red buttons will
button through the stigmata. Then I'm wearing yards and
yards of black organza veil wrapped around my face and
studded with little hand-cut Austrian crystal stars. You can't tell
how I look, face-wise, but that's the whole idea. The look is
elegant and sacrilegious and makes me feel sacred and
immoral.
Haute couture and getting hauler.
Fire inches down the foyer wallpaper. Me, for added set
dressing I started the fire. Special effects can go a long way to
heighten a mood, and it's not as if this is a real house. What's
burning down is a re-creation of a period revival house
patterned after a copy of a copy of a copy of a mock-Tudor big
manor house. It's a hundred generations removed from
anything original, but the truth is aren't we all?
Just before Evie comes screaming down the stairs and
shoots Brandy Alexander, what I did was pour out about a
gallon of Chanel Number Five and put a burning wedding
invitation to it, and boom, I'm recycling.
It's funny, but when you think about even the biggest
tragic fire it's just a sustained chemical reaction. The oxidation
of Joan of Arc.
Still spinning on the floor, the rifle points at me, points at
Brandy.
Another thing is no matter how much you think you love
somebody, you'll step back when the pool of their blood
edges up too close.
Except for all this high drama, it's a really nice day. This is
a warm, sunny day and the front door is open to the porch
and the lawn outside. The fire upstairs draws the warm smell
of the fresh-cut lawn into the foyer, and you can hear all the
wedding guests outside. All the guests, they took the gifts
they wanted, the crystal and silver and went out to wait on
the lawn for the firemen and paramedics to make their
entrance.
Brandy, she opens one of her huge, ring-beaded hands and
she touches the hole pouring her blood all over the marble
floor.
Brandy, she says, "Shit. There's no way the Bon Marche will
take this suit back."
Evie lifts her face, her face a finger-painting mess of soot
and snot and tears from her hands and screams, "I hate my
life being so boring!”
Evie screams down at Brandy Alexander, "Save me a
window table in hell!"
Tears rinse clean lines down Evie's cheeks, and she
screams, "Girlfriend! You need to be yelling some back at me!"
As if this isn't already drama, drama, drama, Brandy looks
up at me kneeling beside her. Brandy's aubergine eyes dilated
out to full flower, she says, "Brandy Alexander is going to die
now?"
Evie, Brandy and me, all this is just a power struggle for
the spotlight. Just each of us being me, me, me first. The
murderer, the victim, the witness, each of us thinks our role is

the lead.
Probably that goes for anybody in the world.
It's all mirror, mirror on the wall because beauty is power
the same way money is power the same way a gun is power.
Anymore, when I see the picture of a twenty-something in
the newspaper who was abducted and sodomized and robbed
and then killed and here's a front-page picture of her young
and smiling, instead of me dwelling on this being a big, sad
crime, my gut reaction is, wow, she'd be really hot if she didn't
have such a big honker of a nose. My second reaction is I'd
better have some good head and shoulders shots handy in case
I get, you know, abducted and sodomized to death. My third
reaction is, well, at least that cuts down on the competition.
If that's not enough, my moisturizer I use is a suspension of
inert fetal solids in hydrogenated mineral oil. My point is
that, if I'm honest, my life is all about me.

My point is, unless the meter is running and some pho-
tographer is yelling: Give me empathy.

Then the flash of the strobe.
Give me sympathy.
Flash.
Give me brutal honesty.
Flash.
"Don't let me die here on this floor," Brandy says, and
her big hands clutch at me. "My hair," she says, "My hair
will be flat in the back."
My point is I know Brandy is maybe probably going to
die, but I just can't get into it.
Evie sobs even louder. On top of this, the fire sirens
from way outside are crowning me queen of Migraine
Town.
The rifle is still spinning on the floor, but slower and
slower.
Brandy says, "This is not how Brandy Alexander wanted
her life to go. She's supposed to be famous, first. You know,
she's supposed to be on television during Super Bowl
halftime, drinking a diet cola naked in slow motion before
she died."
The rifle stops spinning and points at nobody.
At Evie sobbing, Brandy screams, "Shut up!"
" You shut up," Evie screams back. Behind her, the fire is
eating its way down the stairway carpet.
The sirens, you can hear them wandering and screaming all
over the West Hills. People will just knock each other down to dial
9-1-1 and be the big hero. Nobody looks ready for the big television
crew that's due to arrive any minute.
"This is your last chance, honey," Brandy says, and her blood is
getting all over the place. She says, "Do you love me?"
It's when folks ask questions like this that you lose the spotlight.
This is how folks trap you into a best-supporting role.
Even bigger than the house being on fire is this huge
expectation that I have to say the three most worn-out words
you'll find in any script. Just the words make me feel I'm severely
fingering myself. They're just words is all. Powerless. Vocabulary.
Dialogue.
"Tell me," Brandy says. "Do you? Do you really love me?"
This is the big hammy way Brandy has played her whole life.

The Brandy Alexander nonstop continuous live action theater, but
less and less live by the moment.
Just for a little stage business, I take Brandy's hand in mine. This
is a nice gesture, but then I'm freaked by the whole threat of
blood-borne pathogens, and then, boom, the ceiling in the dining
room crashes down and sparks and embers rush out at us from the
dining room doorway.
"Even if you can't love me, then tell me my life,”
Brandy says. "A girl can't die without her life flashing
before her eyes."
Pretty much nobody is getting their emotional needs
met.
It's then the fire eats down the stairway carpet to Evie's
bare ass, and Evie screams to her feet and pounds down the
stairs in her burned-up white high heels. Naked and hairless,
wearing wire and ashes, Evie Cottrell runs out the front door
to a larger audience, her wedding guests, the silver and
crystal and the arriving fire trucks. This is the world we live in.
Conditions change and we mutate.
So of course this'll be all about Brandy, hosted by me, with
guest appearances by Evelyn Cottrell and the deadly AIDS
virus. Brandy, Brandy, Brandy. Poor sad Brandy on her back,
Brandy touches the hole pouring her life out onto the marble
floor and says, "Please. Tell me my life. Tell me how we got
here."
So me, I'm here eating smoke just to document this
Brandy Alexander moment.
Give me attention.
Flash.
Give me adoration.
Flash.
Give me a break.
Flash.
CHAPTER T W O
Don't expect this to be the kind of story that goes: and
then, and then, and then.
What happens here will have more of that fashion
magazine feel, a Vogue or a Glamour magazine chaos with page
numbers on every second or fifth or third page. Perfume
cards falling out, and full-page naked women coming out of
nowhere to sell you make-up.
Don't look for a contents page, buried magazine-style
twenty pages back from the front. Don't expect to find
anything right off. There isn't a real pattern to anything,
either. Stories will start and then, three paragraphs later:
Jump to page whatever.
Then, jump back.
This will be ten thousand fashion separates that mix and
match to create maybe five tasteful outfits. A million trendy
accessories, scarves and belts, shoes and hats and gloves, and
no real clothes to wear them with.
And you really, really need to get used to that feeling,
here, on the freeway, at work, in your marriage. This is the
world we live in. Just go with the prompts.
Jump back twenty years to the white house where I grew

up with my father shooting super-8 movies of my brother and
me running around the yard.
Jump to present time with my folks sitting on lawn chairs
at night, and watching these same super-8 movies projected
on the white side of the same white house, twenty years later.
The house the same, the yard the same, the windows
projected in the movies lined up just perfect with the real
windows, the movie grass aligned with the real grass, and my
movie-projected brother and me being toddlers and running
around wild for the camera.
Jump to my big brother being all miserable and dead
from the big plague of AIDS.
Jump to me being grown up and fallen in love with a
police detective and moved away to become a famous
supermodel.
Just remember, the same as a spectacular Vogue magazine,
remember that no matter how close you follow the jumps:
Continued on page whatever.
No matter how careful you are, there's going to be the
sense you missed something, the collapsed feeling under your
skin that you didn't experience it all. There's that fallen
heart feeling that you rushed right through the moments
where you should've been paying attention.
Well, get used to that feeling. That's how your whole life
will feel some day.
This is all practice. None of this matters. We're just
warming up.
Jump to here and now, Brandy Alexander bleeding to
death on the floor with me kneeling beside her, telling this
story before here come the paramedics.
Jump backward just a few days to the living room of a
rich house in Vancouver, British Columbia. The room is lined
with the rococo hard candy of carved mahogany paneling

with marble baseboards and marble flooring and a very sort-
of curlicue carved marble fireplace. In rich houses where old

rich people live, everything is just what you'd think.
The rubrum lilies in the enameled vases are real, not silk.
The cream-colored drapes are silk, not polished cotton.
Mahogany is not pine stained to look like mahogany. No
pressed-glass chandeliers posing as cut crystal. The leather is
not vinyl.
All around us are these cliques of Louis-the-Fourteenth
chair-sofa-chair.
In front of us is yet another innocent real estate agent,
and Brandy's hand goes out: her wrist thick with bones and
veins, the mountain range of her knuckles, her wilted fingers,
her rings in their haze of marquise-cut green and red, her
porcelain nails painted sparkle pink, she says, "Charmed, I'm
sure."
If you have to start with any one detail, it has to be
Brandy's hands. Beaded with rings to make them look even
bigger, Brandy's hands are enormous. Beaded with rings, as if
they could be more obvious, hands are the one part about
Brandy Alexander the surgeons couldn't change.
So Brandy doesn't even try and hide her hands.
We've been in too many of this kind of house for me to
count, and the realtor we meet is always smiling. This one is

wearing the standard uniform, the navy blue suit with the
red, white, and blue scarf around the neck. The blue heels are
on her feet and the blue bag is hanging at the crook of her
elbow.
The realty woman looks from Brandy Alexander's big hand
to Signore Alfa Romeo standing at Brandy's side, and the
power blue eyes of Alfa attach themselves; those blue eyes you
never see close or look away, inside those eyes is the baby or
the bouquet of flowers, beautiful or vulnerable, that make a
beautiful man someone safe to love.
Alfa's just the latest in a year-long road trip of men
obsessed with Brandy, and any smart woman knows a
beautiful man is her best fashion accessory. The same way you'd
product model a new car or a toaster, Brandy's hand draws a
sight line through the air from her smile and big boobs to
Alfa. "May I introduce," Brandy says, "Signore Alfa Romeo,
professional male consort to the Princess Brandy Alexander."
The same way, Brandy's hand swings from her batting
eyelashes and rich hair in an invisible sight line to me.
All the realty woman is going to see is my veils, muslin and
cut-work velvet, brown and red, tulle threaded with silver,
layers of so much you'd think there's nobody inside. There's
nothing about me to look at so most people don't. It's a look
that says:
Thank you for not sharing.
"May I introduce," Brandy says, "Miss Kay Maclsaac,
personal secretary to the Princess Brandy Alexander."
The realty woman in her blue suit with its brass Chanel
buttons and the scarf tied around her neck to hide all her
loose skin, she smiles at Alfa.
When nobody will look at you, you can stare a hole in
them. Picking out all the little details you'd never stare long
enough to get if she'd ever just return your gaze, this, this is your
revenge. Through my veils, the realtor's glowing red and gold,
blurred at her edges.
"Miss Maclsaac," Brandy says, her big hand still open toward me,
"Miss Maclsaac is mute and cannot speak."
The realty woman with her lipstick on her teeth and her

powder and concealer layered in the crepe under her eyes, her pret-
a-porter teeth and machine-washable wig, she smiles at Brandy

Alexander.
"And this . . . ," Brandy's big ring-beaded hand curls up to touch
Brandy's torpedo breasts.
"This . . . ," Brandy's hand curls up to touch pearls at her
throat.
"This . . . ," the enormous hand lifts to touch the billowing
piles of auburn hair.
"And this . . . ," the hand touches thick moist lips.
"This," Brandy says, "is the Princess Brandy Alexander."
The realty woman drops to one knee in something between a
curtsy and what you'd do before an altar. Genuflecting. "This is
such an honor," she says. "I'm so sure this is the house for you. You
just have to love this house."
Icicle bitch she can be, Brandy just nods and turns back toward
the front hall where we came in.
"Her Highness and Miss Maclsaac," Alfa says, "they would like to
tour the house by themselves, while you and I discuss the details."

Alfa's little hands flutter up to explain, "... the transfer of
funds ... the exchange of lira for Canadian dollars."
"Loonies," the realty woman says.
Brandy and me and Alfa are all flash frozen. Maybe this
woman has seen through us. Maybe after the months we've
been on the road and the dozens of big houses we've hit,
maybe somebody has finally figured out our scam.
"Loonies," the woman says. Again, she genuflects. "We call
our dollars 'Loonies'," she says and jabs a hand in her blue
purse. "I'll show you. There's a picture of a bird on them," she
says. "It's a loon."
Brandy and me, we turn icicle again and start walking

away, back to the front hall. Back through the cliques of chair-
sofa-chair, past the carved marble. Our reflections smear, dim,

and squirm behind a lifetime of cigar smoke on the mahogany
paneling. Back to the front hallway, I follow the Princess

Brandy Alexander while Alfa's voice fills the realtor's blue-
suited attention with questions about the angle of the

morning sun into the dining room and whether the provincial
government will allow a personal heliport behind the
swimming pool.
Going toward the stairs is the exquisite back of Princess
Brandy, a silver fox jacket draped over Brandy's shoulders and
yards of a silk brocade scarf tied around her billowing pile of
Brandy Alexander auburn hair. The queen supreme's voice
and the shadow of L'Air du Temps are the invisible train
behind everything that is the world of Brandy Alexander.
The billowing auburn hair piled up inside her brocade silk
scarf reminds me of a bran muffin. A big cherry cupcake. This
is some strawberry auburn mushroom cloud rising over a
Pacific atoll.
Those princess feet are caught in two sort of gold lame
leg-hold traps with little gold straps and gold chains. These
are the trapped-on, stilted, spike-heeled feet of gold that
mount the first of about three hundred steps from the front
hall to the second floor. Then she mounts the next step, and
the next until all of her is far enough above me to risk
looking back. Only then will she turn the whole strawberry
cupcake of her head. Those big torpedo, Brandy Alexander
breasts silhouetted, the wordless beauty of that professional
mouth in full face.
"The owner of this house," Brandy says, "is very old and
supplementing her hormones and still lives here."
The carpet is so thick under my feet I could be climbing
loose dirt. One step after another, loose and sliding and
unstable. We, Brandy and Alfa and me, we've been speaking
English as a second language so long that we've forgotten it
as our first.
I have no native tongue.
We're eye level with the dirty stones of a dark chandelier.
On the other side of the handrail, the hallway's gray marble
floor looks as if we've climbed a stairway through the clouds.
Step after step. Far away, Alfa's demanding talk goes on
about wine cellars, about kennels for the Russian wolfhounds.
Alfa's constant demand for the realty woman's attention is as
faint as a radio call-in show bouncing back from outer space.
" . . . the Princess Brandy Alexander," Alfa's warm, dark

words float up, "she is probable to remove her clothes and
scream like the wild horses in even the crowded restaurants
..."
The queen supreme's voice and the shadow of L'Air du
Temps says, "Next house," her Plumbago lips say, "Alfa will be
the mute."
" . . . your breasts," Alfa is telling the realty woman, "you
have two of the breasts of a young woman . . . "
Not one native tongue is left among us.
Jump to us being upstairs.
Jump to now anything being possible.
After the realtor is trapped by the blue eyes of Signore
Alfa Romeo, jump to when the real scamming starts. The
master bedroom will always be down the hallway in the
direction of the best view. This master bathroom is paneled in
pink mirror, every wall, even the ceiling. Princess Brandy and I
are everywhere, reflected on every surface. You can see
Brandy sitting on the pink counter at one side of the vanity
sink, me sitting at the other side of the sink.
One of us is sitting on each side of all the sinks in all the
mirrors. There are just too many Brandy Alexanders to count,
and they're all being the boss of me. They all open their

white calfskin clutch bags, and hundreds of those big ring-
beaded Brandy Alexander hands take out

new copies of the Physicians' Desk Reference with its red
cover, big as a Bible.
All her hundreds of Burning Blueberry eye shadow eyes
look at me from all over the room.
"You know the drill," all her hundreds of Plumbago
mouths command. Those big hands start pulling open
drawers and cabinet doors. "Remember where you got
everything, and put it back exactly where you found it," the
mouths say. "We'll do the drugs first, then the makeup. Now
start hunting."
I take out the first bottle. It's Valium, and I hold the
bottle so all the hundred Brandys can read the label.
"Take what we can get away with," Brandy says, "then get
on to the next bottle."
I shake a few of the little blue pills into my purse pocket
with the other Valiums. The next bottle I find is Darvons.
"Honey, those are heaven in your mouth," all the
Brandys look up to peer at the bottle I'm holding. "Does it
look safe to take too many?"
The expiration date on the label is only a month away, and
the bottle is still almost full. I figure we can take about half.
"Here," a big ring-beaded hand comes at me from every
direction. One hundred big hands come at me, palm up. "Give
Brandy a couple. The princess is having lower back pain again."
I shake ten capsules out, and a hundred hands toss a
thousand tranquilizers onto the red carpet tongues of those
Plumbago mouths. A suicide load of Darvon slides down into
the dark interior of the continents that make up a world of
Brandy Alexander.
Inside the next bottle are the little purple ovals of 2.5-
milligram—sized Premarin.
That's short for Pregnant Mare Urine. That's short for
thousands of miserable horses in North Dakota and Central

Canada, forced to stand in cramped dark stalls with a
catheter stuck on them to catch every drop of urine and only
getting let outside to get fucked again. What's funny is that
describes pretty much any good long stay in a hospital, but
that's only been my experience.
"Don't look at me that way," Brandy says. "My not taking
those pills won't bring any baby horses back from the dead."
In the next bottle are round, peach-colored little scored
tablets of 100-milligram Aldactone. Our homeowner must be a
junkie for female hormones.
Painkillers and estrogen are pretty much Brandy's only two
food groups, and she says, "Gimme, gimme, gimme." She snacks
on some little pink-coated Estinyls. She pops a few of the
turquoise-blue Estrace tablets. She's using some vaginal
Premarin as a hand cream when she says, "Miss Kay?" She
says, "I can't seem to make a fist, Sweetness. Do you think,
maybe you can wrap things up without me while I lie down?"
The hundreds of me cloned in the pink bathroom mirrors,
we check out the make-up while the princess goes off to cat nap in
the cabbage rose and old canopy bed glory of the master bedroom. I
find Darvocets and Percodans and Compazines, Nembutals and
Percocets. Oral estrogens. Anti-androgens. Progestons. Transdermal
estrogen patches. I find none of Brandy's colors, no Rusty Rose
blusher. No Burning Blueberry eye shadow. I find a vibrator with the
dead batteries swollen and leaking acid inside.
It's an old woman who owns this house, I figure. Ignored and
aging and drugged-out old women, older and more invisible to the
world every minute, they must not wear a lot of make-up. Not go
out to fun hot spots. Not boogie to a party froth. My breath smells
hot and sour inside my veils, inside the damp layers of silk and mesh
and cotton georgette I lift for the first time all day; and in the
mirrors, I look at the pink reflection of what's left of my face.
Mirror, mirror on the wall, who's the fairest one of all?
The evil queen was stupid to play Snow White's game. There's
an age where a woman has to move on to another kind of power.
Money, for example. Or a gun.
I'm living the life I love, I tell myself, and loving the life I live.
I tell myself: I deserved this.
This is exactly what I wanted.
CHAPTER T H R E E
Until I met Brandy, all I wanted was for somebody to ask me
what happened to my face.
"Birds ate it," I wanted to tell them.
Birds ate my face.
But nobody wanted to know. Then nobody doesn't include
Brandy Alexander.
Just don't think this was a big coincidence. We had to meet,
Brandy and me. We had so many things in common. We had close
to everything in common. Besides, it happens fast for some people
and slow for some, accidents or gravity, but we all end up
mutilated. Most women know this feeling of being more and
more invisible everyday. Brandy was in the hospital for months
and months, and so was I, and there's only so many hospitals where
you can go for major cosmetic surgery.
Jump back to the nuns. The nuns were the worst about always

pushing, the nuns who were nurses. One nun would tell me about
some patient on a different floor who was funny and charming. He
was a lawyer and could do magic tricks with just his hands and a
paper napkin. This day nurse was the kind of nun who wore a white
nursing version of her regular nun uniform, and she'd told this
lawyer all about me. This was Sister Katherine. She told him I was
funny and bright, and she said how sweet it would be if the two of
us could meet and fall madly in love.
Those were her words.
Halfway down the bridge of her nose, she'd look at me through
wire-framed glasses, their lenses long and squared the way
microscope slides look. Little broken veins kept the end of her
nose red. Rosacea, she called this. It would be easier to see her
living in a gingerbread house than a convent. Married to Santa
Claus instead of God. The starched apron she wore over her habit
was so glaring white that when I'd first arrived, fresh from my big
car accident, I remembered how all the stains from my blood
looked black.
They gave me a pen and paper so I could communicate. They
wrapped my head in dressings, yards of tight gauze holding wads
of cotton in place, metal butterfly sutures gripping all over so
I wouldn't unravel. They fingered on a thick layer of antibiotic
gel, claustrophobic and toxic under the wads of cotton.
My hair they pulled back, forgotten and hot under the
gauze where I couldn't get at it. The invisible woman.
When Sister Katherine mentioned this other patient, I
wondered if maybe I'd seen him around, her lawyer, the cute,
funny magician.
"I didn't say he was cute," she said.
Sister Katherine said, "He's still a little shy."
On the pad of paper, I wrote:
still?
"Since his little mishap," she said and smiled with her
eyebrows arched and all her chins tucked down against her
neck. "He wasn't wearing his seatbelt."
She said, "His car rolled right over the top of him."
She said, "That's why he'd be so perfect for you."
Early on, while I was still sedated, somebody had taken the
mirror out of my bathroom. The nurses seemed to steer me
away from polished anything the way they kept the suicides
away from knives. The drunks away from drinks. The closest I
had to a mirror was the television, and it only showed how I
used to look.
If I asked to see the police photos from the accident, the
day nurse would tell me, "No." They kept the photos in a file
at the nursing station, and it seemed anybody could ask to
see them except me. This nurse, she'd say, "The doctor thinks
you've suffered enough for the time being."
This same day nurse tried to fix me up with an accountant whose
hair and ears were burned off in a propane blunder. She
introduced me to a graduate student who'd lost his throat and
sinuses to a touch of cancer. A window washer after his three-story
tumble head first onto concrete.
Those were all her words, blunder, touch, tumble. The lawyer's
mishap. My big accident.
Sister Katherine would be there to check my vital signs every six
hours. To check my pulse against the sweep second hand on her

man's wristwatch, thick and silver. To wrap the blood pressure cuff
around my arm. To check my temperature, she'd push some kind of
electric gun in my ear.
Sister Katherine was the kind of nun who wears a "wedding ring.
And married people always think love is the answer.
Jump back to the day of my big accident, when everybody was so
considerate. The people, the folks who let me go ahead of them in
the emergency room. What the police insisted. I mean, they gave
me this hospital sheet with "Property of La Paloma Memorial
Hospital" printed along the edge in indelible blue. First they gave
me morphine, intravenously. Then they propped me up on a gurney.
I don't remember much of this, but the day nurse told me
about the police photos.
In the pictures, these big eight-by-ten glossies as nice as
anything in my portfolio. Black and white, the nurse said. But
in these eight-by-tens I'm sitting up on a gurney with my back
against the emergency room wall. The attending nurse spent
ten minutes cutting my dress off with those tiny operating
room manicure scissors. The cutting, I remember. It was my
cotton crepe sundress from Espre. I remember that when I
ordered this dress from the catalogue I almost ordered two,
they're so comfortable, loose with the breeze trying to get
inside the arm holes and lift the hem up around your waist.
Then you'd sweat if there wasn't a breeze, and the cotton
crepe stuck on you like eleven herbs and spices, only on you
the dress was almost transparent. You'd walk onto a patio, it
was a great feeling, a million spotlights picking you out of the
crowd, or walk into a restaurant when outside it was ninety
degrees, and everyone would turn and look as if you'd just
been awarded some major distinguished award for a major
lifetime achievement.
That's how it felt. I can remember this kind of attention.
It always felt ninety degrees hot.
And I remember my underwear.
Sorry, Mom, sorry, God, but I was wearing just this little
patch up front with an elastic string waist and just one string
running down the crack and back around to the bottom of
the patch up front. Flesh-tone. That one string, the one down
the crack, butt floss is what everybody calls that string. I wore
the patch underwear because of when the cotton crepe
sundress goes almost transparent. You just don't plan on
ending up in the emergency room with your dress cut off and
detectives taking your picture, propped up on a gurney with
a morphine drip in one arm and a Franciscan nun screaming
in one ear. "Take your pictures! Take your pictures, now!
She's still losing blood!"
No, really, it was funnier than it sounds.
It got funny when there I was sprawled on this gurney, this
anatomically correct rag doll with nothing but this little
patch on and my face was the way it is now.
The police, they had the nun hold this sheet up over my
breasts. It's so they can take pictures of my face, but the
detectives are so embarrassed for me, being sprawled there
topless.
Jump to when they refuse to show me the pictures, one of
the detectives says that if the bullet had been two inches
higher, I'd be dead.

I couldn't see their point.
Two inches lower, and I'd be deep fried in my spicy cotton
crepe sundress, trying to get the insurance guy to waive the
deductible and replace my car window. Then, I'd be by a
swimming pool, wearing sunblock and telling a couple cute
guys how I was driving on the freeway in Stingray when a
rock or I don't know what, but my dri-ver's-side window just
burst.
And the cute guys would say, "Whoa."
Jump to another detective, the one who'd searched my car
for the slug and bone fragments, that stuff, the detective
saw how I'd been driving with the window half open. A car
window, this guy tells me over the eight-by-ten glossies of
me wearing a white sheet, a car window should always be all
the way open or shut. He couldn't remember how many
motorists he'd seen decapitated by windows in car accidents.
How could I not laugh.
That was his word: Motorists.
The way my mouth was, the only sound left I could do was
laugh. I couldn't not laugh.

Jump to after there were the pictures, when people stop-
ped looking at me.

My boyfriend, Manus, came in that evening, after the
emergency room, after I'd been wheeled off on my gur-ney
to surgery, after the bleeding had stopped and I was in a
private room. Then Manus showed up. Manus Kelley who was
my fiance until he saw what was left. Manus sat looking at the
black-and-white glossies of my new face, shuffling and
reshuffling them, turning them upside-down and right side
up the way you would one of those mystery pictures where
one minute you have a beautiful woman, but when you look
again you have a hag.
Manus says, "Oh, God."
Then says, "Oh, sweet, sweet Jesus."
Then says, "Christ."
The first date I ever had with Manus, I was still living with
my folks. Manus showed me a badge in his wallet. At home, he
had a gun. He was a police detective, and he was really
successful in Vice. This was a May and December thing. Manus
was twenty-five and I was eighteen, but we went out. This is
the world we live in. We went sailing one time, and he wore
a Speedo, and any smart woman should know that means
bisexual at least.
My best friend, Evie Cottrell, she's a model. Evie says that
beautiful people should never date each other. Together,
they just don't generate enough attention. Evie says there's a
whole shift in the beauty standard when they're together.
You can feel this, Evie says. When both of you are beautiful,
neither of you is beautiful. Together, as a couple, you're less
than the sum of your parts.
Nobody really gets noticed, not any more.
Still, there I was one time, taping this infomercial, one of
those long-long commercials you think will end at any
moment because after all it's just a commercial, but it's
actually thirty minutes long. Me and Evie, we're hired to be
walking sex furniture to wear tight evening dresses all
afternoon and entice the television audience into buying the

Num Num Snack Factory. Manus comes to sit in the studio
audience, and after the shoot he goes, "Let's go sailing," and
I go, "Sure!"
So we went sailing, and I forgot my sunglasses, so Manus
buys me a pair on the dock. My new sunglasses are the exact
same as Manus's Vuarnets, except mine are made in Korea
not Switzerland and cost two dollars.
Three miles out, I'm walking into deck things. I'm falling
down. Manus throws me a rope, and I miss it. Manus throws
me a beer and I miss the beer. A headache, I get the kind of
headache God would smote you with in the Old Testament.
What I don't know is that one of my sunglass lenses is darker
than the other, almost opaque. I'm blind in one eye because
of this lens, and I have no depth perception.
Back then I don't know this, that my perception is so
fucked up. It's the sun, I tell myself, so I just keep wearing the
sunglasses and stumbling around blind and in pain.
Jump to the second time Manus visits me in the hospital,
he tells the eight-by-ten glossies of me in my sheet, Property
of La Paloma Memorial Hospital, that I should think about
getting back into my life. I should start making plans. You
know, he says, take some classes. Finish my degree.
He sits next to my bed and holds the photos between us so I
can't see either them or him. On my pad, with my pencil I ask
Manus in writing to show me.
"When I was little, we raised Doberman puppies," he says from
behind the photos. "And when a puppy is about six months old you
get its ears and tail cropped. It's the style for those dogs. You go to
a motel where a man travels from state to state cutting the ears and
tails off thousands of Doberman puppies or boxers or bull terriers."
On my pad with my pencil, I write:
your point being?
And I wave this in his direction.
"The point is whoever cuts your ears off is the one you'll hate for
the rest of your life," he says. "You don't want your regular
veterinarian to do the job so you pay a stranger."
Still looking at picture after picture, Manus says, "That's the
reason I can't show you these."
Somewhere outside the hospital, in a motel room full of bloody
towels with his tool box of knives and needles, or driving down the
highway to his next victim, or kneeling over a dog, drugged and
cut up in a dirty bathtub, is the man a million dogs must hate.
Sitting next to my bed, Manus says, "You just need to archive
your cover-girl dreams."
The fashion photographer inside my head, yells:
Give me pity.
Flash.
Give me another chance.
Flash.
That's what I did before the accident. Call me a big liar, but
before the accident I told people I was a college student. If
you tell folks you're a model, they shut down. Your being a
model will mean they're networking with some lower life
form. They start using baby talk. They dumb down. But if you
tell folks you're a college student, folks are so impressed. You
can be a student in anything and not have to know anything.
Just say toxicology or marine biokinesis, and the person

you're talking to will change the subject to himself. If this
doesn't work, mention the neural synapses of embryonic
pigeons.
It used to be I was a real college student. I have about
sixteen hundred credits toward an undergraduate degree in
personal fitness training. What I hear from my parents is that I
could be a doctor by now.
Sorry, Mom.
Sorry, God.
There was a time when Evie and me went out to dance
clubs and bars and men would wait outside the ladies' room
door to catch us. Guys would say they were casting a television
commercial. The guy would give me a business card and ask
what agency I was with.
There was a time when my mom came to visit. My mom
smokes, and the first afternoon I came home from a shoot, she
held out a matchbook and said, "What's the meaning of
this?"
She said, "Please tell me you're not as big a slut as your
poor dead brother.”
In the matchbook was a guy's name I didn't know and a
telephone number.
"This isn't the only one I found," Mom said. "What are you
running here?"
I don't smoke. I tell her that. These matchbooks pile up
because I'm too polite not to take them and I'm too frugal to
just throw them away. That's why it takes a whole kitchen
drawer to hold them, all these men I can't remember and
their telephone numbers.
Jump to no day special in the hospital, just outside the
office of the hospital speech therapist. The nurse was leading
me around by my elbow for exercise, and as we came around
this one corner, just inside the open office doorway, boom,
Brandy Alexander was just so there, glorious in a seated
Princess Alexander pose, in an iridescent Vivienne Westwood
cat suit changing colors with her every move.
Vogue on location.
The fashion photographer inside my head, yelling:
Give me wonder, baby.
Flash.
Give me amazement.
Flash.
The speech therapist said, "Brandy, you can raise the pitch
of your voice if you raise your laryngeal cartilage. It's that
bump in your throat you feel going up as you sing ascending
scales." She said, "If you can keep your voice-box raised high
in your throat, your voice should stay between a G and a
middle C. That's about 160 Hertz."
Brandy Alexander and the way she looked turned the rest
of the world into virtual reality. She changed color from
every new angle. She turned green with my one step. Red
with my next. She turned silver and gold and then she was
dropped behind us, gone.
"Poor, sad misguided thing," Sister Katherine said, and she
spat on the concrete floor. She looked at me craning my neck
to see back down the hall, and she asked if I had any family.
I wrote: yeah, there's my gay brother but he's dead from

AIDS.
And she says, "Well, that's for the best, then, isn't it?"
Jump to the week after Manus's last visit, last meaning
final, when Evie drops by the hospital. Evie looks at the
glossies and talks to God and Jesus Christ.
"You know," Evie tells me across a stack of Vogues, and
Glamour magazines in her lap she brings me, "I talked to the
agency and they said that if we re-do your portfolio they'll
consider taking you back for hand work."
Evie means a hand model, modeling cocktail rings and
diamond tennis bracelets and shit.
Like I want to hear this.
I can't talk.
All I can eat is liquids.
Nobody will look at me. I'm invisible.
All I want is somebody to ask me what happened. Then, I'll
get on with my life.
Evie tells the stack of magazines, "I want you to come live with
me at my house when you get out." She unzips her canvas bag on
the edge of my bed and goes into it with both hands. Evie says,
"It'll be fun. You'll see. I hate living all by my lonesome."
And says, "I've already moved your things into my spare
bedroom."
Still in her bag, Evie says, "I'm on my way to a shoot. Any chance
you have any agency vouchers you can lend me?"
On my pad with my pencil, I write:
is that my sweater you're wearing?
And I wave the pad in her face.
"Yeah," she says, "but I knew you wouldn't mind."
I write:
but it's a size six.
I write:
and you're a size nine.
"Listen," Evie says. "My call is for two o'clock. Why don't I stop
by some time when you're in a better mood?"
Talking to her watch, she says, "I'm so sorry things had to go this
way. It wasn't all of it anybody's fault.”
Every day in the hospital goes like this:
Breakfast. Lunch. Dinner. Sister Katherine falls in
between.
On television is one network running nothing but
infomercials all day and all night, and there we are, Evie and
me, together. We got a raft of bucks. For the snack factory
thing, we do these big celebrity spokesmodel smiles, the
ones where you make your face a big space heater. We're
wearing these sequined dresses that when you get them
under a spotlight, the dress flashes like a million reporters
taking your picture. So glamorous. I'm standing there in this
twenty-pound dress, doing this big smile and dropping
animal wastes into the Plexiglas funnel on top of the Num
Num Snack Factory. This thing just poops out little canapes
like crazy, and Evie has to wade out into the studio audience
and get folks to eat the canapes.
Folks will eat anything to get on television.
Then, off camera, Manus goes, "Let's go sailing."
And I go, "Sure."
It was so stupid, my not knowing what was happening all

along.
Jump to Brandy on a folding chair just inside the office of
the speech therapist, shaping her fingernails with the scratch
pad from a book of matches. Her long legs could squeeze a
motorcycle in half, and the legal minimum of her is shrink
wrapped in leopard-print stretch terry just screaming to get out.
The speech therapist says, "Keep your glottis partially open as
you speak. It's the way Marilyn Monroe sang "Happy Birthday" to
President Kennedy. It makes your breath bypass your vocal chords
for a more feminine, helpless quality."
The nurse leads me past in my cardboard slippers, my tight
bandages and deep funk, and Brandy Alexander looks up at the
last possible instant and winks. God should be able to wink that
good. Like somebody taking your picture. Give me joy. Give me fun.
Give me love.
Flash.
Angels in heaven should blow kisses the way Brandy Alexander
does and lights up the rest of my week. Back in my room, I write:
who is she?
"No one you should have any truck with," the nurse says.
"You'll have problems enough as it is."
but who is she? I write.
"If you can believe it," the nurse says, "that one is someone
different every week."
It's after that Sister Katherine starts matchmaking. To save me
from Brandy Alexander, she offers me the lawyer without a nose. She
offers a mountain climbing dentist whose fingers and facial
features are eaten down to little hard shining bumps by frostbite. A
missionary with dark patches of some tropical fungus just under
his skin. A mechanic who leaned over a battery the moment
it exploded and the acid left his lips and cheeks gone and his
yellow teeth showing in a permanent snarl.
I look at the nun's wedding ring and write:
i guess you got the last really buff guy.
The whole time I was in the hospital, no way could I fall
in love. I just couldn't go there yet. Settle for less. I didn't
want to process through anything. I didn't want to pick up
any pieces. Lower my expectations. Get on with my less-than
life. I didn't want to feel better about being still alive. Start
compensating. I just wanted my face fixed, if that was
possible, which it wasn't.
When it's time to reintroduce me to solid foods, their
words again, it's pureed chicken and strained carrots. Baby
foods. Everything mashed or pulverized or crushed.
You are what you eat.
The nurse brings me the personal classified ads from a
newsletter. Sister Katherine peers down her nose and
through her glasses to read: Guys seeking slim, adventurous
girls for fun and romance. And, yes, it's true, not one single
guy specifically excludes hideous mutilated girls with growing
medical bills.
Sister Katherine tells me, "These men you can write to in
prison don't need to know how you really look."
It's just too much trouble to try and explain my feelings to
her in writing.
Sister Katherine reads me the singles columns while I
spoon up my roast beef. She offers arsonists. Burglars. Tax

cheats. She says, "You probably don't want to date a rapist, not
right off. Nobody's that desperate."
Between the lonely men behind bars for armed robbery
and second-degree manslaughter, she stops to ask what's the
matter. She takes my hand and talks to the name on my
plastic bracelet, such a hand model I am already, cocktail rings,
plastic I.D. bracelets so beautiful even a bride of Christ can't
take her eyes off them. She says, "What're you feeling?"
This is hilarious.
She says, "Don't you want to fall in love?"
The photographer in my head says: Give me patience.
Flash.
Give me control.
Flash.
The situation is I have half a face.
Inside my bandages, my face still bleeds tiny little spots of
blood onto the wads of cotton. One doctor, the one making
rounds every morning who checks my dressing, he says my
wound is still weeping. That's his word.
I still can't talk.
I have no career.
I can only eat baby food. Nobody will ever look at me like
I've won a big prize ever again.
nothing, I write on my pad.
nothing's wrong.
"You haven't mourned," Sister Katherine says. "You need
to have a good cry and then get on with your life. You're
being too calm about this."
I write:
don't make me laugh, my face, I write, the doctor sez my
wound will weep.
Still, at least somebody had noticed. This whole time, I was
calm. I was the picture of calm. I never, never panicked. I saw
my blood and snot and teeth splashed all over the dashboard
the moment after the accident, but hysteria is impossible
without an audience. Panicking by yourself is the same as
laughing alone in an empty room. You feel really silly.
The instant the accident happened, I knew I would die if I
didn't take the next exit off the freeway, turn right on
Northwest Gower, go twelve blocks, and turn into the La
Paloma Memorial Hospital Emergency Room parking lot. I
parked. I took my keys and my bag and I walked. The glass
doors slid aside before I could see myself reflected in them.
The crowd inside, all the people waiting with broken legs
and choking babies, they all slid aside, too, when they saw
me.
After that, the intravenous morphine. The tiny operating
room manicure scissors cut my dress up. The flesh-tone little
patch panties. The police photos.
The detective, the one who searched my car for bone
fragments, the guy who'd seen all those people get their
heads cut off in half-open car window's, he comes back one
day and says there's nothing left to find. Birds, seagulls,
maybe magpies, too. They got into the car where it was
parked at the hospital, through the broken window.

The magpies ate all of what the detective calls the soft tis-
sue evidence. The bones they probably carried away.

"You know, miss," he says, "to break them on rocks. For the
marrow."
On the pad, with the pencil, I write:
ha, ha, ha.
Jump to just before my bandages come off, when a speech
therapist says I should get down on my knees and thank God
for leaving my tongue in my head, unharmed. We sit in her
cinderblock office with half the room filled by her steel desk
between us, and the therapist, she teaches me how a
ventriloquist makes a dummy talk. You see, the ventriloquist
can't let you see his mouth move. He can't really use his lips, so
he presses his tongue against the roof of his mouth to make
words.
Instead of a window, the therapist has a poster of a kitten
covered in spaghetti above the words:
Accentuate the Positive
She says that if you can't make a certain sound without
using your lips, substitute a similar sound, the therapist says;
for instance, use the sound eth instead of the sound eff. The
context in which you use the sound will make you
understandable.
"I'd rather be thishing," the therapist says.
then go thishing, I write.
thank you.
And then I ran away. This is after my new cotton crepe sundress
arrives from Espre. Sister Katherine stood over me all morning with
a curling iron until my hair was this big butter creme frosting
hairdo, this big off-the-face hairdo. Then Evie brought some make
up and did my eyes. I put on my spicy new dress and couldn't wait to
start sweating. This whole summer, I hadn't seen a mirror or if I did I
never realized the reflection was me. I hadn't seen the police
photos. When Evie and Sister Katherine were done, I say, "De foil
iowa fog geoff."
And Evie says, "You're welcome."
Sister Katherine says, "But you just ate lunch."
It's clear enough, nobody understands me here.
I say, "Kong wimmer nay pee golly."
And Evie says, "Yeah, these are your shoes, but I'm not hurting
them any."
And Sister Katherine says, "No, no mail yet, but we can write to
prisoners after you've had your nap, dear."
They left. And. I left, alone. And. How bad could it be, my face?
And sometimes being mutilated can work to your advantage.
All those people now with piercings and tattoos and brandings and
scarification . . . What I mean is, attention is attention.
Going outside is the first time I feel I've missed something. I
mean, a whole summer had just disappeared. All
those pool parties and lying around on metal-flake speed-flesh-tone
lumps of ice in the freezer bin. I dig around until I find the
biggest turkey, and I heft it up baby style in its yellow
plastic netting.
I haul myself up to the front of the store, right through
the check stands, and nobody stops me. Nobody's even
looking. They're all reading those tabloid newspapers as if
there's hidden gold there.
"Sejgfn di ofo utnbg," I say. "Nei wucj iswisn sdnsud."
Nobody looks.

"EVSF UYYB IUH," I say in my best ventriloquist voice.
Nobody even talks. Maybe just the clerks talk. Do you
have two pieces of I.D.? they're asking people writing
checks.
"Fgjrn iufnv si vuv," I say. "Xidi cniwuw sis sacnc!"
Then it is, it's right then a boy says, "Look!"
Everybody who's not looking and not talking stops
breathing.
The little boy says, "Look Mom, look over there! That
monster's stealing food!"
Everybody gets all shrunken up with embarrassment. All
their heads drop down into their shoulders the way they'd
look on crutches. They're reading tabloid headlines harder
than ever.
Monster Girl Steals Festive Holiday Bird
And there I am, deep fried in my cotton crepe dress, a twenty-five
pound turkey in my arms, the turkey sweating, my dress almost
transparent. My nipples are rock kind is wearing this sleeveless
Versace kind of tank dress with this season's overwhelming feel of
despair and corrupt resignation. Body conscious yet humiliated.
Buoyant but crippled. The queen supreme is the most beautiful
anything I've ever seen so I just vogue there to watch from the
doorway.
"Men," the therapist says, "stress the adjective when they
speak." The therapist says, "For instance, a man would say, 'You
are so attractive, today'."
Brandy is so attractive you could chop her head off and put it on
blue velvet in the window at Tiffany's and somebody would buy it
for a million dollars.
"A woman would say, 'You are so attractive, today'," the therapist
says. "Now, you, Brandy. You say it. Stress the modifier, not the
adjective."
Brandy Alexander looks her Burning Blueberry eyes at me in the
doorway and says, "Posing girl, you are so Godawful ugly. Did you
let an elephant sit on your face or what?"
Brandy's voice, I barely hear what she says. At that instant, I just
adore Brandy so much. Everything about her feels as good as being
beautiful and looking in a mirror. Brandy is my instant royal family.
My only everything to live for.
I go, "Cfoieb svns ois," and I pile the cold, wet turkey into the
speech therapist's lap, her sitting pinned under twenty-five
pounds of dead meat in her roll-around leather desk chair.

From closer down the hallway, Sister Katherine is yelling, "Yoo-
hoo!"

"Mriuvn wsi sjaoi aj," I go, and wheel the therapist and her chair
into the hallway. I say, "Jownd wine sm fdo dcncw."
The speech therapist, she's smiling up at me and says, "You
don't have to thank me, it's just my job is all."
The nun's arrived with the man and his I.V. stand, a new man
with no skin or crushed features or all his teeth bashed out, a man
who'd be perfect for me. My one true love. My deformed or
mutilated or diseased prince charming. My unhappily ever after. My
hideous future. The monstrous rest of my life.
I slam the office door and lock myself inside with Brandy
Alexander. There's the speech therapist's notebook on her desk,
and I grab it.
save me, I write, and wave it in Brandy's face. I write:

please.
Jump to Brandy Alexander's hands. This always starts with her

hands. Brandy Alexander puts a hand out, one of those hairy pig-
knuckled hands with the veins of her arm crowded and squeezed to

the elbow with bangle bracelets of every color. Just by herself,
Brandy Alexander is such a shift in the beauty standard that no one
thing stands out. Not even you.
"So, girl," Brandy says. "What all happened to your face?"
Birds.
I write:
birds, birds ate my face.
And I start to laugh.
Brandy doesn't laugh. Brandy says, "What's that supposed
to mean?"
And I'm still laughing.
i was driving on the freeway, I write.
And I'm still laughing.
someone shot a 30-caliber bullet from a rifle.
the bullet tore my entire jawbone off my face.
Still laughing.
i came to the hospital, I write.
i did not die.
Laughing.
they couldn't put my jaw back because seagulls had eaten
it.
And I stop laughing.
"Girl, your handwriting is terrible," Brandy says. "Now tell
me what else."
And I start to cry.
what else, I write, is i have to eat baby food.
i can't talk.
i have no career.
i have no home.
my fiance left me.
nobody will look at me.
all my clothes, my best friend ruined them.
I'm still crying.
"What else?" Brandy says. "Tell me everything."
a boy, I write.
a little boy in the supermarket called me a monster.
Those Burning Blueberry eyes look right at me the way no eyes
have all summer. "Your perception is all fucked up," Brandy says.
"All you can talk about is trash that's already happened."
She says, "You can't base your life on the past or the present."
Brandy says, "You have to tell me about your future."
Brandy Alexander, she stands up on her gold lame leg-hold trap
shoes. The queen supreme takes a jeweled compact out of her clutch
bag and snaps the compact open to look at the mirror inside.
"That therapist," those Plumbago lips say, "the speech therapist
can be so stupid about these situations."
The big jeweled arm muscles of Brandy sit me down in the seat
still hot from her ass, and she holds the compact so I can see inside.
Instead of face powder, it's full of white capsules. Where there
should be a mirror, there's a close up photo of Brandy Alexander
smiling and looking terrific.
"They're Vicodins, dear," she says. "It's the Marilyn Monroe
school of medicine where enough of any drug will cure any

disease."
She says, "Dig in. Help yourself."
The thin and eternal goddess that she is, Brandy's picture smiles
up at me over a sea of painkillers. This is how I met Brandy
Alexander. This is how I found the strength not to get on with my
former life. This is how I found the courage not to pick up the same
old pieces.
"Now," those Plumbago lips say, "You are going to tell me your
story like you just did. Write it all down. Tell that story over and
over. Tell me your sad-assed story all night." That Brandy queen
points a long bony finger at me.
"When you understand," Brandy says, "that what you're
telling is just a story. It isn't happening anymore. When you realize the
story you're telling is just words, when you can just crumble it up and
throw your past in the trashcan," Brandy says, "then we'll figure out
who you're going to be.”
CHAPTER F O U R
Jump to the Canadian border.
Jump to the three of us in a rented Lincoln Town Car, waiting to
drive south from Vancouver, British Columbia, into the United States,
waiting, with Signore Romeo in the driver's seat, waiting with
Brandy next to him in the front, waiting, with me alone in the
back.
"The police have microphones," Brandy tells us.
The plan is if we make it through the border, we'll drive south

to Seattle where there are nightclubs and dance clubs where go-
go boys and go-go girls will line up to buy the pockets of my purse

clean. We have to be quiet because the police, they have
microphones on both sides of the border, United States and
Canadian. This way, they
can listen in on people waiting to cross. We could have Cuban
cigars. Fresh fruit. Diamonds. Diseases. Drugs, Brandy says. Brandy,
she tells us to shut up a mile before the border, and we wait in line,
quiet.
Brandy unwinds the yards and yards of brocade scarf around her
head. Brandy, she shakes her hair down her back and ties the scarf
over her shoulders to hide her torpedo cleavage. Brandy switches to
simple gold earrings. She takes off her pearls and puts on a little
chain with a gold cross. This is a moment before the border guard.
"Your nationalities?" the border-guard guy sitting inside his
little window, behind his computer terminal with his clipboard and
his blue suit behind his mirrored sunglasses, and behind his gold
badge says.
"Sir," Brandy says, and her new voice is as bland and drawled out
as grits without salt or butter. She says, "Sir, we are citizens of the
United States of America, what used to be called the greatest
country on earth until the homosexuals and child pornographers—
"Your names?" says the border guy.
Brandy leans across Alfa to look up at the border guy, "My
husband," she says, "is an innocent man."
"Your name, please," he says, no doubt looking up our license
plate, finding it's a rental car, rented in Billings, Montana, three
weeks ago, maybe even finding the truth about who we really are.
Maybe finding bulletin after bulletin from all over western
Canada about three nut cases stealing drugs at big houses up for

sale. Maybe all this is spooling onto his computer screen, maybe
none of it. You never know.
"I am married," Brandy is almost yelling to get his attention. "I
am the wife of the Reverend Scooter Alexander," she says, still half
laid across Alfa's lap.
"And this," she says and draws the invisible line from her smile
to Alfa, "this is my son-in-law, Seth Thomas." Her big hand flies
toward me in the backseat. "This," she says, "is my daughter,
Bubba-Joan."
Some days, I hate it when Brandy changes our lives without
warning. Sometimes, twice in one day, you have to live up to a new
identity. A new name. New relationships. Handicaps. It's hard to
remember who I started this road trip being.
No doubt, this is the kind of stress the constantly mutating
AIDS virus must feel.
"Sir?" the border guy says to Seth, formerly Alfa Romeo,
formerly Chase Manhattan, formerly Nash Rambler, formerly Wells
Fargo, formerly Eberhard Faber. The guard says, "Sir, are you
bringing any purchases back with you into the United States?"
My pointed little toe of my shoe reaches under the front seat and
gooses my new husband. The details of everything have us
surrounded. The mud flats left by low tide are just over there, with
little waves arriving one after another. The flower beds on our other
side are planted to spell out words you can only read from a long
ways off. Up close, it's just so many red and yellow wax begonias.
"Don't tell me you've never watched our Christian Healing
Network'?" Brandy says. She fiddles with the little gold cross at her
throat. "If you just watched one show, you'd know that God in his
wisdom has made my son-in-law a mute, and he cannot speak."
The border guy keyboards some quick strokes. This could be
"CRIME" he's typed. Or "DRUGS." Or SHOOT. It could be SMUGGLERS.
Or ARREST.
"Not a word," Brandy whispers next to Seth's ear, "You talk and
in Seattle, I'll change you into Harvey Wallbanger."
The border guy says, "To admit you to the United States, I'm
going to have to see your passports, please."
Brandy licks her lips wet and shining, her eyes moist and bright.
Her brocade scarf slips low to reveal her cleavage as she looks up at
the border guy and says, "Would you excuse us a moment."
Brandy sits back in her own seat, and Seth's window hums all
the way up.
Brandy's big torpedoes inhale big and then exhale. "Don't
anybody panic," she says, and pops her lipstick open. She makes a
kiss in the rearview mirror and pokes the lipstick around the edge
of her big Plumbago mouth, trembling so much that her one big
hand has to hold her lipstick hand steady.
"I can get us back into the States," she says, "but I'm going to
need a condom and a breath mint."
Around her lipstick she says, "Bubba-Joan, be a sweetheart and
hand me up one of those Estraderms, will you?"
Seth gives her the mint and a condom.
She says, "Let's guess how long it takes him to find a week's
supply of girl juice soaking into his ass."
She pops the lipstick shut and says, "Blot me, please."
I hand her up a tissue and an estrogen patch.

C H A P T E R F I V E

Jump way back to one day outside Brumbach's Depart-
ment Store where people are stopped to watch somebody's dog

lift its leg on the Nativity scene, Evie and me included. Then
the dog sits and rolls back on its spine, licks its own lumpy
dog-flavored butthole, and Evie elbows me. People applaud
and throw money.
Then we're inside Brumbach's, testing lipsticks on the back
of our hands, and I say, "Why is it dogs lick themselves?"
"Just because they can . . . ," Evie says. "They're not like
people."
This is just after we've killed an eight-hour day in
modeling school, looking at our skin in mirrors, so I'm like,
"Evie, do not even kid yourself."
My passing grade in modeling school was just because Evie'd
dragged down the curve. She'd wear shades of lipstick you'd
expect to see around the base of a penis. She'd wear so much
eye shadow you'd think she was a product testing animal.
Just from her hair spray, there's a hole in the ozone over the
Taylor Robberts Modeling Academy.
This is way back before my accident when I thought my
life was so good.
At Brumbach's Department Store, where we'd kill time
after class, the whole ninth floor is furniture. Around the
edges are display rooms: bedrooms, dining rooms, living rooms,
dens, libraries, nurseries, family rooms, china hutches, home
offices, all of them open to the inside of the store. The
invisible fourth wall. All of them perfect, clean and carpeted,
full of tasteful furniture, and hot with track lighting and too
many lamps. There's the hush of white noise from hidden
speakers. Alongside the rooms, shoppers pass in the dim
linoleum aisles that run between the display rooms and the
down-lighted islands that fill the center of the floor,
conversation pits and sofa suites grouped on area rugs with
coordinated floor lamps arid fake plants. Quiet islands of
light and color in the darkness teeming with strangers.
"It's just like a sound stage," Evie would say. "The little
sets all ready for somebody to shoot the next episode. The
studio audience watching you from the dark.”
Customers would stroll by and there would be Evie and me
sprawled on a pink canopy bed, calling for our horoscopes on her
cell phone. We'd be curled on a tweedy sofa sectional, munching
popcorn and watching our soaps on a console color television. Evie -
will pull up her T-shirt to show me another new belly button
piercing. She'll pull down the armhole of her blouse and show me
the scars from her implants.
"It's too lonely at my real house," Evie would say, "And I hate
how I don't feel real enough unless people are watching."
She says, "I don't hang around Brumbach's for privacy."
At home in my apartment I'd have Manus with his magazines.
His guy-on-guy porno magazines he had to buy for his job, he'd
say. Over breakfast every morning, he'd show me glossy pictures of
guys self-sucking. Curled up with their elbows hooked behind their
knees and craning their necks to choke on themselves, each guy
would be lost in his own little closed circuit. You can bet almost
every guy in the world's tried this. Then Manus would tell me, "This

is what guys want."
Give me romance.
Flash.
Give me denial.
Each little closed loop of one guy flexible enough or with a dick
so big he doesn't need anybody else in the world, Manus would
point his toast at these pictures and tell me, "These guys don't
need to put up with jobs or relationships." Manus would just chew,
staring at each magazine. Forking up his scrambled egg whites, he'd
say, "You could live and die this way."
Then I'd go downtown to the Taylor Robberts Modeling
Academy to get myself perfected. Dogs will lick their butts. Evie will
self-mutilate. All this navel gazing. At home, Evie had nobody
except she had a ton of family money. The first time we rode a city
bus to Brumbach's, she offered the driver her credit card and
asked for a window seat. She was worried her carry-on was too big.
Me with Manus or her alone, you don't know who of us had it
worse at home.
But at Brumbach's, Evie and me, we'd cat nap in any of the
dozen perfect bedrooms. We'd stuff cotton between our toes and
paint our nails in chintz-covered club chairs. Then we'd study our
Taylor Robberts modeling textbook at a long polished dining table.
"Here's the same as those fakey reproductions of natural
habitats they build at zoos," Evie would say. "You know, those
concrete polar ice caps and those rainforests made of welded pipe
trees holding sprinklers."
Every afternoon, Evie and me, we'd star in our own personal
unnatural habitat. The clerks would sneak off to find sex in the
men's room. We'd all soak up attention in our own little matinee
life.
All's I remember from Taylor Robberts is to lead with my pelvis
when I walk. Keep your shoulders back. To model different-sized
products, they'd tell you to draw an invisible sight line from yourself
to the item. For toasters, draw a line through the air from your
smile to the toaster. For a stove, draw the line from your breasts. For
a new car, start the invisible line from your vagina. What it boils
down to is professional modeling means getting paid to overreact
to stuff like rice cakes and new shoes.
We'd drink diet colas on a big pink bed at Brumbach's. Or sit at a
vanity, using contouring powder to change the shape of our faces
while the faint outline of people watched us from the darkness a
few feet away. Maybe the track lights would flash off somebody's
glasses. With our every little move getting attention, every
gesture, everything we said, it's easy to pick up on the rush you'd
get.
"It's so safe and peaceful, here," Evie'd say, smoothing the pink
satin comforter and fluffing the pillows. "Nothing very bad
could ever happen to you here. Not like at school. Or at home."
Total strangers would stand there with their coats on, watching
us. The same's those talk shows on television, it's so easy to be
honest with a big enough audience. You can say anything if enough
people will listen.
"Evie, honey," I'd say. "There's lots worse models in our class.
You just need to not have an edge to your blusher." We'd be looking
at ourselves in a vanity mirror, a triple row of nobodies watching
us from behind.
"Here, sweetie," I'd say, and give her a little sponge, "blend."

And Evie would start to cry. Your every emotion goes right over

the top with a big audience. It's either laughter or tears, with no in-
between. Those tigers in zoos, they must just live a big opera all the

time.
"It's not just my wanting to be a glamorous fashion model,"
Evie would say. "It's when I think of my growing up, I'm so sad."
Evie would choke back her tears. She'd clutch her little sponge and
say, "When I was little, my parents wanted me to be a boy." She'd
say, "I just never want to be that miserable again."
Other times, we'd wear high heels and pretend to slap each
other hard across the mouth because of some guy we both wanted.
Some afternoons we'd confess to each other that we were vampires.
"Yeah," I'd say. "My parents used to abuse me, too."
You had to play to the crowd.
Evie would turn her fingers through her hair. "I'm getting my
guiche pierced," she'd say. "It's that little ridge of skin running
between your asshole and the bottom of your vagina."
I'd go to flop on the bed, center stage, hugging a pillow and
looking up into the black tangle of ducts and sprinkler pipes you
had to imagine was a bedroom ceiling.
"It's not like they hit me or made me drink satanic blood or
anything," I'd say. "They just liked my brother more because he was
mutilated.”
And Evie would cross to center stage by the Early American
nightstand to upstage me.
"You had a mutilated brother?" she'd say.
Somebody watching us would cough. Maybe the light would
glint off a wrist-watch.
"Yeah, he was pretty mutilated, but not in a sexy way. Still,
there's a happy ending," I'd say. "He's dead now."
And really intense, Evie would say, "Mutilated how? Was he
your only brother? Older or younger?"
And I'd throw myself off the bed and shake my hair. "No, it's
too painful."
"No, really," Evie would say. "I'm not kidding."
"He was my big brother by a couple years. His face was all
exploded in a hairspray accident, and you'd think my folks totally
forgot they even had a second child," I'd dab my eyes on the pillow
shams and tell the audience. "So I just kept working harder and
harder for them to love me."
Evie would be looking at nothing and saying, "Oh, my shit! Oh,
my shit!" And her acting, her delivery would be so true it would just
bury mine.
"Yeah," I'd say. "He didn't have to work at it. It was so easy. Just
by being all burned and slashed up with scars, he hogged all the
attention."
Evie would go close-up on me and say, "So where's he now, your
brother, do you even know?"
"Dead," I'd say, and I'd turn to address the audience. "Dead of
AIDS."
And Evie says, "How sure are you?”
And I'd say, "Evie!"
"No, really," she'd say. "I'm asking for a reason."
"You just don't joke about AIDS," I'd say.
And Evie'd say, "This is so next-to-impossible."
This is how easy the plot gets pumped out of control. With all
these shoppers expecting real drama, of course, I think Evie's just

making stuff up.
"Your brother," Evie says, "did you really see him die? For real?
Or did you see him dead? In a coffin, you know, with music. Or a
death certificate?"
All those people were watching.
"Yeah," I say. "Pretty much." Like I'd want to get caught lying?
Evie's all over me. "So you saw him dead or you didn't?"
All those people watching.
"Dead enough."
Evie says, "Where?"
"This is very painful," I say, and I cross stage right to the living
room.
Evie chases after me, saying, "Where?"
All those people watching.
"The hospice," I say.
"What hospice?"
I keep crossing stage right to the next living room, the next
dining room, the next bedroom, den, home office, with Evie
dogging me and the audience hovering along next to us.
"You know how it is," I say. "If you don't see a gay guy for so
long, it's a pretty safe bet."
And Evie says, "So you don't really know that he's dead?"
We're sprinting through the next bedroom, living room,
dining room, nursery, and I say, "It's AIDS, Evie. Fade to black."
And then Evie just stops and says, "Why?"
And the audience has started to abandon me in a thousand
directions.
Because I really, really, really want my brother to be dead.
Because my folks want him dead. Because life is just easier if he's
dead. Because this way, I'm an only child. Because it's my turn,
damn it. My turn.
And the crowd of shoppers is bailed, leaving just us and the
security cameras instead of God watching to catch us when we fuck
up.
"Why is this such a big deal to you?" I say.
And Evie's already wandering away from me, leaving me alone
and saying, "No reason." Lost in her own little closed circuit. Licking
her own butthole, Evie says, "It's nothing." Saying, "Forget it.”
C H A P T E R S I X
On the planet Brandy Alexander, the universe is run by a fairly
elaborate system of gods and she-gods. Some evil. Some are ultimate
goodness. Marilyn Monroe, for example. Then there's Nancy Reagan
and Wallis Warfield Simpson. Some of the gods and she-gods are
dead. Some are alive. A lot are plastic surgeons.
The system changes. Gods and she-gods come and go and
leapfrog each other for a change of status.
Abraham Lincoln is in his heaven to make our car a floating
bubble of new-car—smelling air: driving as smooth as advertising
copy. These days, Brandy says Marlene Dietrich is in charge of the
weather. Now is the autumn of our ennui. We're carried down
Interstate 5 under gray skies, inside the blue casket interior of a
rented Lincoln Town Car. Seth is driving. This is how we always sit,
with Brandy up front and me in the back. Three hours of scenic
beauty between Vancouver, British Columbia, and Seattle is what
we're driving through. Asphalt and internal combustion carry us

and the Lincoln Town Car south.
Traveling this way, you might as well be watching the world on
television. The electric windows are hummed all the way up so the
planet Brandy Alexander has an atmosphere of warm, still, silent
blue. It's an even 70 degrees Fahrenheit, with the whole outside
world of trees and rocks scrolling by in miniature behind curved
glass. Live by satellite. We're the little world of Brandy Alexander
rocketing past it all.
Driving, driving, Seth says, "Did you ever think about life as a
metaphor for television?"
Our rule is that when Seth's driving, no radio. What happens is
a Dionne Warwick song comes on, and Seth starts to cry so hard,
crying those big Estinyl tears, shaking with those big Provera sobs.
If Dionne Warwick comes on singing a Burt Bacharach song, we just
have to pull over or it's sure we'll get car wrecked.
The tears, the way his dumpling face is lost the chiseled
shadows that used to pool under his brow and cheekbones, the way
Seth's hand will sneak up and tweak his nipple through his shirt and
his mouth will drop open and his eyes roll backward, it's the
hormones. The conjugated estrogens, the Premarin, the estradiol,
the ethinyl estradi-ol, they've all found their way into Seth's diet
cola. Of course, there's the danger of liver damage at his current
daily overdose levels. There could already be liver damage or cancer
or blood clots, thrombosis if you're a doctor, but I'm willing to take
that chance. Sure, it's all just for fun. Watching for his breasts to
develop. Seeing his macho babe-magnet swagger go to fat and him
taking naps in the afternoon. All that's great, but his being dead
would let me move on to explore other interests.
Driving, driving, Seth says, "Don't you think that somehow
television makes us God?"
This introspection is new. His beard growth is lightened up. It
must be the antiandrogens choking back his testosterone. The
water retention, he can ignore. The moodiness. A tear slips out of
one eye in the rearview mirror and rolls down his face.
"Am I the only one who cares about these issues?" he says. "Am
I the only one here in this car who feels anything real?"
Brandy's reading a paperback book. Most times, Brandy is reading
some plastic surgeon's glossy hard-sell brochure about vaginas
complete with color pictures showing the picture-perfect way a urethra
should be aligned to ensure a downward stream of urine. Other
pictures show how a top-quality clitoris should be hooded. These are
five-figure, ten-and twenty-thousand-dollar vaginas, better than the
real thing, and most days Brandy will pass the pictures around.
Jump to three weeks before, when we were in a big house in
Spokane, Washington. We were in a South Hill granite chateau with
Spokane spread out under the bathroom windows. I was shaking
Percodans out of their brown bottle and into my purse pocket for
Percodans. Brandy Alexander, she was digging around under the
bathroom sink for a clean emery board when she found this
paperback book.
Now all the other gods and she-gods have been eclipsed by some
new deity.
Jump back to Seth looking at my breasts in the rearview mirror.
"Television really does make us God," he says.
Give me tolerance.
Flash.
Give me understanding.

Flash.
Even after all these weeks on the road with me, Seth's glorious
vulnerable blue eyes still won't meet my eyes. His new wistful

introspection, he can ignore. The way the orals have already side-
effected his eyes, steepened the corneal curve so he can't wear his

contact lenses without them popping out. This has to be the
conjugated estrogens in his orange juice every morning. He can
ignore all that.
This has to be the Androcur in his iced tea at lunch, but he'll
never figure it out. He'll never catch me.
Brandy Alexander, her nylon stocking feet up on the
dashboard, the queen supreme's still reading her paperback.
"When you watch daytime dramas," Seth tells me, "you can
look in on anybody. There's a different life on every channel, and
almost every hour the lives change. It's the same as those live video
Web sites. You can watch the whole world without it knowing."
For three weeks, Brandy's been reading that book.
"Television lets you spy on even the sexy parts of everybody's
life," Seth says. "Doesn't it make sense?"
Maybe, but only if you're on 500 milligrams of micronized
progesterone every day.
A few minutes of scenery go by behind glass. Just some towering
mountains, old dead volcanoes, mostly the kind of stuff you find
outside. Those timeless natural nature themes. Raw materials at
their rawest. Unrefined. Unimproved rivers. Poorly maintained
mountains. Filth. Plants growing in dirt. Weather.
"And if you believe that we really have free will, then you know
that God can't really control us," Seth says. Seth's hands are off the
steering wheel and flutter around to make his point. "And since
God can't control us," he says, "all God does is watch and change
channels when He gets bored."
Somewhere in heaven, you're live on a video Web site for God to
surf.
Brandycam.
Brandy with her empty leg-hold trap shoes on the floor,
Brandy licks an index finger and slow turns a page.
Ancient aboriginal petroglyphs and junk are just
whizzing past.
"My point," Seths says, "is that maybe TV makes you God."
Seth says, "And it could be that all we are is God's television."
Standing on the gravel shoulder are some moose or
whatnot just trudging along on all four feet.
"Or Santa Glaus," says Brandy from behind her book.
"Santa Glaus sees everything."
"Santa Glaus is just a story," says Seth. "He's just the
opening band to God. There is no Santa Glaus."
Jump to drug hunting three weeks ago in Spokane,
Washington, when Brandy Alexander flopped down in the
master bedroom and started reading. I took thirty-two
Nembutals. Thirty-two Nembutals went in my purse. I don't
eat the merchandise. Brandy was still reading. I tried all the
lipsticks on the back of my hand, and Brandy was still propped
on a zillion eyelet lace pillows in the center of a king-sized
waterbed. Still reading.
I put some expired estradiol and a half stick of
Plumbago in my bag. The realtor called up the stairs, was
everything all right?

Jump to us on Interstate 5 where a billboard goes by.
Clean Food and Family Prices Coming Up at the Karver Stage
Stop Cafe
Jump to no Burning Blueberry, no Rusty Rose or Aubergine
Dreams in Spokane.
He didn't want to rush us, the realtor called up the
stairs, but was there anything we needed to know? Did we
have any questions about anything?

I stuck my head in the master bedroom, and the water-
bed's white duvet held a reading Brandy Alexander that was

dead for as much as she was breathing.
Oh, clipped lilac satin of the beaded rice pearl hemline.
Oh, layered amber cashmere trimmed in faceted topaz
marabou.
Oh, slithering underwired free-range mink bolero.
We had to go.

Brandy clutched her paperback open against her straight-
up torpedo boob job. The Rusty Rose face pillowed in auburn

hair and eyelet lace pillow shams, the aubergine eyes had the
dilated look of a Thorazine overdose.
First thing I want to know is what drug she's taken.
The paperback cover showed a pretty blonde babe. Thin
as a spaghetti strap. With a pretty, thin little smile. The
babe's hair was a satellite photo of Hurricane Blonde just off
the west coast of her face. The face was a Greek she-god
with great lash, big eyeliner eyes the same as Betty and
Veronica and all the other Archie gals had at Riverdale High.
White pearls are wrapped up her arms and around her neck.
What could be diamonds sparkle here and there.
The paperback cover said Miss Rona.
Brandy Alexander, her leg-hold trap shoes were getting
dirt all over the waterbed's white duvet, and Brandy said,
"I've found out who the real God is."
The realtor was ten seconds away.

Jump to all the wonders of nature blurring past us, rab-
bits, squirrels, plunging waterfalls. That's the worst of it.

Gophers digging subterranean dens underground. Birds
nesting in nests.
"The Princess B. A. is God," Seth tells me in the
rearview mirror.
Jump to where the Spokane realtor yelled up the stairs.
The people who owned the granite chateau were coming up
the driveway.
Brandy Alexander, her eyes dilated, barely breathing in a
Spokane waterbed, said "Rona Barrett. Rona Barrett is my
new Supreme Being.”
Jump to Brandy in the Lincoln Town Car saying, "Rona Barrett is
God."
All around us, erosion and insects are just chewing up the world,
never mind people and pollution. Everything biodegrades with or
without you pushing. I check my purse for enough spironolactone
for Seth's afternoon snack. Another billboard goes by:
Tasty Phase Magic Bran—Put Something Good In Your Mouth
"In her autobiography," Brandy Alexander testifies, "in Miss
Rona, published by Bantam Books by arrangement with the Nash
Publishing Corporation on Sunset Boulevard in Los Angeles,
California . . . ," Brandy takes a deep breath of new-car—smelling air,

" . . . copyright 1974, Miss Rona tells us how she started life as a fat
little Jewish girl from Queens with a big nose and a mysterious
muscle disease."
Brandy says, "This little fat brunette re-creates herself as a top
celebrity superstar blonde whom a top sex symbol then begs to let
him stick his penis in her just one inch."
There isn't one native tongue left among us.
Another billboard:
Next Sundae, Scream For Tooter's Ice Milk!
"What that woman has gone through," says Brandy. "Right
here on page one hundred and twenty-five, she almost drowns in
her own blood! Rona's just had her nose job. She's only making fifty
bucks a story, but this woman saves enough for a thousand-dollar
nose job! It's her first miracle. So, Rona's in the hospital, post—nose
job, with her head wrapped up like a mummy when a friend comes
in and says how Hollywood says she's a lesbian. Miss Rona, a lesbian!
Of course this isn't true. The woman is a she-god so she screams and
screams and screams until an artery in her throat just bursts."
"Hallelujah," Seth says, all teared up again.
"And here," Brandy licks the pad of a big index finger and flips
ahead a few pages, "on page two hundred and twenty-two, Rona is
once more rejected by her sleazy boyfriend of eleven years. She's
been coughing for weeks so she takes a handful of pills and is found
semicomatose and dying. Even the ambulance—
"Praise God," Seth says.
Various native plants are growing just wherever they want.
"Seth, sweetness," Brandy says. "Don't step on my lines." Her
Plumbago lips say, "Even the ambulance driver thought our Miss
Rona would be DOA."
Clouds composed of water vapor are up in the, you know, sky.
Brandy says, "Now, Seth."
And Seth says, "Hallelujah!"
The wild daisies and Indian paintbrush whizzing past are just
the genitals of a different life form.
And Seth says, "So what are you saying?"
"In the book Miss Rona, copyright 1974," Brandy says, "Rona
Barrett—who got her enormous breasts when she was nine years
old and wanted to cut them off with scissors—she tells us in the
prologue of her book that she's like this animal, cut open with all its
vital organs glistening and quivering, you know, like the liver and
the large intestine. Such visuals, everything sort of dripping and
pulsating. Anyway, she could wait for someone to sew her back up,
but she knows no one will. She has to take a needle and thread and
sew herself up"
"Gross," says Seth.
"Miss Rona says nothing is gross," Brandy says. "Miss Rona says
the only way to find true happiness is to risk being completely cut
open."
Flocks of self-absorbed little native birds seem obsessed with
finding food and picking it up with their mouths.
Brandy pulls the rearview mirror around until she finds me
reflected and says, "Bubba-Joan, sweetness?"
It's obvious the native birds have to build their own do-it-yourself
nests using materials they source locally. The little sticks and leaves
are just sort of heaped together.
"Bubba-Joan," Brandy Alexander says. "Why don't you open up
to us with a story?"

Seth says, "Remember the time in Missoula when the princess
got so ripped she ate Nebalino suppositories wrapped in gold foil
because she thought they were Almond Roca? Talk about your
semiconscious DOAs."
Pine trees are producing pine cones. Squirrels and mammals of
all sexes spend all day trying to get laid. Or giving birth live. Or
eating their young.
Brandy says, "Seth, sweetness?"
"Yes, Mother."
What only looks like bulimia is how bald eagles feed their
young.
Brandy says, "Why is it you have to seduce every living thing you
come across?"
Another billboard:
Nubby's Is the BBQ Gotta-Stop for Savory, Flavory Chicken Wings
Another billboard:
Dairy Bite—The Chewing Gum Flavored With the Low-Fat
Goodness of Real Cheese
Seth giggles. Seth blushes and twists some of his hair around a
finger. He says, "You make me sound so sexually compulsive."
Mercy. Next to him, I feel so butch.
"Oh, baby," Brandy says, "You don't remember half of who
you've been with." She says, "Well, I only wish I could forget it."
To my breasts in the rearview mirror, Seth says, "The only
reason why we ask other people how their weekend was is so we
can tell them about our own weekend."
I figure, a few more days of increased micronized progesterone,
and Seth should pop out his own nice rack of hooters. Side effects I
need to watch for include nausea, vomiting, jaundice, migraine,
abdominal cramps, and dizziness. You try to remember the exact
toxicity levels, but why bother.
A sign goes by saying: Seattle 130 miles.

"Come on, let's see those glistening, quivering innards, Bubba-
Joan," Brandy Alexander, God and mother of us all, commands.

"Tell us a gross personal story."
She says, "Rip yourself open. Sew yourself shut," and she hands a
prescription pad and an Aubergine Dreams eyebrow pencil to me
in the backseat.
CHAPTER S E V E N

Jump way back to the last Thanksgiving before my acci-
dent when I go home to eat dinner with my folks. This is back

when I still had a face so I wasn't so confronted by solid food.
On the dining room table, covering it all over is a tablecloth I
don't remember, a really nice dark blue damask with a lace
edge. This isn't something I'd expect my mom to buy so I ask,
did somebody give this to her?
Mom's just pulling up to the table and unfolding her blue
damask napkin with everything steaming between us: her,
me, and my dad. The sweet potatoes under their layer of
marshmallows. The big brown turkey. The rolls are inside a
quilted cozy sewed to look like a hen. You lift the wings to take
a roll out. There's the cut-glass tray of sweet pickles and celery
filled with peanut butter.
"Give what?" my mom says.
The new tablecloth. It's really nice.
My father sighs and plunges a knife into the turkey.

"It wasn't going to be a tablecloth at first," Mom says. "Your
father and I pretty much dropped the ball on our original project."
The knife goes in again and again and my father starts to
dismember our dinner.
My mom says, "Do you know what the AIDS memorial quilt is all
about?"
Jump to how much I hate my brother at this moment.
"I bought this fabric because I thought it would make a nice
panel for Shane," Mom says. "We just ran into some problems
with what to sew on it."
Give me amnesia.
Flash.
Give me new parents.
Flash.
"Your mother didn't want to step on any toes," Dad says. He
twists a drumstick off and starts scraping the meat onto a plate.
"With gay stuff you have to be so careful since everything
means something in secret code. I mean, we didn't want to give
people the wrong idea."
My mom leans over to scoop yams onto my plate, and says,
"Your father wanted a black border, but black on a field of blue
would mean Shane was excited by leather sex, you know,
bondage and discipline, sado and masochism." She says,
"Really these panels are to help the people left behind."
"Strangers are going to see us and see Shane's name," my
dad says. "We didn't want them thinking things."
The dishes all start their slow clockwise march around the
table. The stuffing. The olives. The cranberry sauce.
"I wanted pink triangles but all the panels have pink

triangles," my mom says. "It's the Nazi symbol for homo-
sexuals." She says, "Your father suggested black triangles, but

that would mean Shane was a lesbian. It looks like the female
pubic hair. The black triangle does."
My father says, "Then I wanted a green border, but it
turns out that would mean Shane was a male prostitute."
My mom says, "We almost chose a red border, but that
would mean fisting. Brown would mean either scat or
rimming, we couldn't figure which."
"Yellow," my father says, "means watersports."
"A lighter shade of blue," Mom says, "would mean just
regular oral sex."
"Regular white," my father says, "would mean anal.
White could also mean Shane was excited by men wearing
underwear." He says, "I can't remember which."
My mother passes me the quilted chicken with the rolls still
warm inside.
We're supposed to sit and eat with Shane dead all over the
table in front of us.
"Finally we just gave up," my mom says, "and I made a nice
tablecloth out of the material."
Between the yams and the stuffing, Dad looks down at his plate
and says, "Do you know about rimming?"
I know it isn't table talk.
"And fisting?" my mom asks.
I say, I know. I don't mention Manus and his vocational porno
magazines.
We sit there, all of us around a blue shroud with the turkey

more like a big dead baked animal than ever, the stuffing chock
full of organs you can still recognize, the heart and gizzard and
liver, the gravy thick with cooked fat and blood. The flower
centerpiece could be a casket spray.
"Would you pass the butter, please?" my mother says. To my
father she says, "Do you know what felchirig is?"
This, it's too much. Shane's dead, but he's more the center of
attention than he ever was. My folks wonder why I never come
home, and this is why. All this sick horrible sex talk over
Thanksgiving dinner, I can't take this. It's just Shane this and Shane
that. It's sad, but what happened to Shane was not something I did.
I know everybody thinks it's my fault, what happened. The truth is
Shane destroyed this family. Shane was bad and mean, and he's
dead. I'm good and obedient and I'm ignored.
Silence.
All that happened was I was fourteen years old. Somebody
put a full can of hairspray in the trash by mistake. It was Shane's
job to burn the trash. He was fifteen. He was dumping the
kitchen trash into the burning barrel while the bathroom
trash was on fire, and the hair-spray exploded. It was an
accident.
Silence.
Now what I wanted my folks to talk about was me. I'd tell
them how Evie and me were shooting a new infomer-cial. My
modeling career was taking off. I wanted to tell them about
my new boyfriend, Manus, but no. Whether he's good or bad,
alive or dead, Shane still gets all the attention. All I ever get is
angry.
"Listen," I say. This just blurts out. "Me," I say, "I'm the
last child you people have left alive so you'd better start
paying me some attention."
Silence.
"Felching," I lower my voice. I'm calm now. "Felching is
when a man fucks you up the butt without a rubber. He
shoots his load, and then plants his mouth on your anus and
sucks out his own warm sperm, plus whatever lubricant and
feces are present. That's felching. It may or may not," I add,
"include kissing you to pass the sperm and fecal matter into
your mouth."
Silence.
Give me control. Give me calm. Give me restraint.
Flash.
The yams are just the way I like them, sugary sweet but
crunchy on top. The stuffing is a little dry. I pass my mother
the butter.
My father clears his throat. "Bump," he says, "I think
'fletching' is the word your mother meant." He says, "It
means to slice the turkey into very thin strips."
Silence.
I say, oh. I say, sorry.
We eat.
CHAPTER E I G H T
Don't look for me to ever tell my folks about the accident. You
know, a whole long-distance telephone crying jag about the bullet
and the emergency room. That's not anywhere we're going. I told my
folks, as soon as I could write them a letter that I was going on a

catalogue shoot in Cancun, Mexico, for Espre.
Six months of fun, sand, and me trying to suck the lime wedges
out of long-necked bottles of Mexican beer. Guys just love watching
babes do that. Go figure. Guys.
She loves clothes from Espre, my mom writes back. She writes
how, since I'll be in the Espre catalogue, could I maybe get her a
discount on her Christmas order.
Sorry, Mom. Sorry, God.
She writes back: Well, be pretty for us. Love and kisses.
Most times, it's just a lot easier not to let the world know what's
wrong. My folks, they call me Bump. I was the bump inside my
Mom's stomach for nine months; they've called me Bump from since
before I was born. They live a two-hour drive from me, but I never
visit. What I mean is they don't need to know every little hair about
me.
In one letter my mom writes:
"At least with your brother, we know whether he's dead or
alive."
My dead brother, the King of Fag Town. The voted best at
everything. The basketball king until he was sixteen and his test
for strep throat came back as gonorrhea, I only know I hated him.
"It's not that we don't love you," my mom writes in one letter,
"it's just that we don't show it."
Besides, hysteria is only possible with an audience. You know
what you need to do to keep alive. Folks will just screw you up with
their reactions about how what happened is so horrible. First the
emergency room folks letting you go ahead of them. Then the
Franciscan nun screaming. Then the police with their hospital
sheet.
Jump to how life was when you were a baby and you could only
eat baby food. You'd stagger over to the coffee table. You're up on
your feet and you have to keep waddling along on those Vienna
sausage legs or fall down. Then you get to the coffee table and
bounce your big soft baby head on the sharp corner.
You're down, and man, oh man, it hurts. Still it isn't
anything tragic until Morn and Dad run over. Oh, you poor,
brave thing. Only then do you cry.
Jump to Brandy and me and Seth going to the top of the
Space Needle thing in Seattle, Washington. This is our first
stop after the Canadian border except us stopping so I could
run buy Seth a coffee—cream, sugar and Climara—and a
Coca Cola—extra Estrace, no ice. It's eleven, and the Space
Needle closes at midnight, and Seth says there are two types of
people in the world.
The Princess Alexander wanted to find a nice hotel first,
some place with valet parking and tile bathrooms. We might
have time for a nap before she has to go out and sell
medications.
"If you were on a game show," Seth says about his two
types of people. Seth has already pulled off the freeway and
we're driving between dark warehouses, turning toward
every glimpse we get of the Space Needle. "So you're the
winner of this game show," Seth says, "and you get a choice
between a five-piece living room set from Broyhill, suggested
retail price three thousand dollars— or—a ten-day trip to the
old world charm of Europe."
Most people, Seth says, would take the living room set.

"It's just that people want something to show for their
effort," Seth says. "Like the pharaohs and their pyramids.
Given the choice, very few people would choose the trip even if
they already had a nice living room set."
No one's parked on the streets around Seattle Center, people
are all home watching television, or being television if you believe
in God.
"I have to show you where the future ended," says Seth. "I
want us to be the people who choose the trip."
According to Seth, the future ended in 1962 at the Seattle
World's Fair. This was everything we should've inherited: the
whole man on the moon within this decade—asbestos is our
miracle friend—nuclear-powered and fossil-fueled world of the Space
Age where you could go up to visit the Jetsons' flying saucer
apartment building and then ride the monorail downtown for fun
pillbox hat fashions at the Bon Marche.
All his hope and science and research and glamour left here in
ruins:
The Space Needle.
The Science Center with its lacy domes and hanging light
globes.
The Monorail streaking along covered in brushed aluminum.
This is how our lives were supposed to turn out.
Go there. Take the trip, Seth says. It will break your heart

because the Jetsons with their robot maid, Rosie, and their flying-
saucer cars and toaster beds that spit you out in the morning, it's

like the Jetsons have sublet the Space Needle to the Flintstones.
"You know," says Seth, "Fred and Wilma. The garbage
disposal that's really a pig that lives under the sink. All their
furniture made out of bones and rocks and tiger-skin
lampshades. Wilma vacuums with a baby elephant and fluffs
the rocks. They named their baby 'Pebbles'."

Here was our future of cheese-food and aerosol propel-
lants, Styrofoam and Club Med on the moon, roast beef

served in a toothpaste tube.

"Tang," says Seth, "you know, breakfast with the astro-
nauts. And now people come here wearing sandals they

made themselves out of leather. They name their kids Zilpah
and Zebulun out of the Old Testament. Lentils are a big deal."
Seth sniffs and drags a hand across the tears in his eyes. It's
the Estrace is all. He must be getting premenstrual.
"The folks who go to the Space Needle now," Seth says,
"they have lentils soaking at home and they're walking
around the ruins of the future the way barbarians did when
they found Grecian ruins and told themselves that God
must've built them."
Seth parks us under one big steel leg of the Space
Needle's three legs. We get out and look up at the legs going
up to the Space Needle, the low restaurant, the high
restaurant that revolves, then the observation deck at the
top. Then the stars.Jump to the sad moment when we buy
our tickets and get on the big glass elevator that slides up
the middle of the Space Needle. We're in this glass and
brass go-go cage dance party to the stars. Going up, I want
to hear hypoal-lergenic Telestar music, untouched by
human hands. Anything computer-generated and played on
a Moog synthesizer. I want to dance the frug on a TWA

commuter flight go-go dance party to the moon where
cool dudes and chicks do the mash potato under zero
gravity and eat delicious snack pills.
I want this.
I tell Brandy Alexander this, and she goes right up to
the brass and glass windows and does the frug even
though going up, the G forces make this like dancing the
frug on Mars where you weigh eight hundred pounds.
The sad part is when the guy in a poly-blend uniform
who runs the elevator misses the whole point of the
future. The whole fun, fun, fun of the moment is wasted
on him, and this guy looks at us as if we're those puppies
you see behind glass in suburban mall pet stores. Like
we're those puppies with yellow ooze on their eyes and
buttholes, and you know they'll never have another solid
bowel movement but they're still for sale for six hundred
dollars apiece. Those puppies are so sad that even the
overweight girls with bad beauty college perms will tap on
the glass for hours and say, "I loves you, little one. Mommy
loves you, tiny one."
The future is just wasted on some people.
Jump to the observation deck at the top of the Space
Needle, where you can't see the steel legs so it's as if you're
hovering over Seattle on a flying saucer with a lot of souvenirs
for sale. Still, most of this isn't souvenirs of the future. It's the
ecology T-shirts and batiks and tie-dyed all-natural cotton
fiber stuff you can't wash with anything else because it's never
really colorfast. Tapes of whales singing while they do sex.
More stuff I hate.
Brandy goes off in search of relics and artifacts from the
future. Acrylic. Plexiglas. Aluminum. Styrofoam. Radium.
Seth goes to the railing and leans out over the suicide nets
and spits. The spit falls back down into the twenty-first
century. The wind blows my hair out over the darkness and
Seattle and my hands are clutched white on the steel railing
where about a million hands before me have clutched the
paint off.
Inside his clothes, instead of the plates of hard muscle that
used to drive me crazy, now the fat pushes his shirt out over
the top of his belt. It's the Premarin. His sexy five o'clock
shadow is fading from the Provera. Even his fingers swell
around his old letterman's ring.
The photographer in my head says:
Give me peace.
Flash.
Give me release.
She gives us each an Aubergine Dreams eyebrow pencil and
says, "Save the world with some advice from the future."
Seth writes on the back of a card and hands the card to Brandy
for her to read.
On game shows, Brandy reads, some people will take the trip to
France, but most people will take the washer dryer pair.
Brandy puts a big Plumbago kiss on the little square for the
stamp and lets the wind lift the card and sail it off toward the
towers of downtown Seattle.
Seth hands her another, and Brandy reads:
Game shows are designed to make us feel better about the random,

useless facts that are all we have left of our education.
A kiss, and the card's on its way toward Lake Washington.
From Seth:
When did the future switch from being a promise to being a
threat?
A kiss, and it's off on the wind toward Ballard.
Only when we eat up this planet will God give us another. We'll
be remembered more for what we destroy than what we create.
Interstate 5 snakes by in the distance. From high atop the Space
Needle, the southbound lanes are red chase lights, and the
northbound lanes are white chase lights. I take a card and write:

CHAPTER NINE
Jump to us going down fast in a TWA return trip home from
the moon, Brandy and Seth and me dancing our dance party frug
in the zero-gravity brass and glass go-go cage elevator. Brandy
makes a big ring-beaded fist and tells the poly-blend service droid
who tries to stop us to chill out unless he wants to die on reentry.
Back on earth in the twenty-first century, our rented Lincoln
with its blue casket interior is waiting to take us to a nice hotel. On
the windshield is a ticket, but when Brandy storms over to tear it
up, the ticket is a postcard from the future.
Maybe my worst fears.
For Brandy to read out loud to Seth. I love Seth so much I have to
destroy him . . .
Even if I overcompensate, nobody will ever want me. Not Seth.
Not my folks. You can't kiss someone who has no lips. Oh, love me, love
me, love me, love me, love me, love me, love me, love me. I'll be
anybody you want me to be.
Brandy Alexander, her big hand lifts the postcard. The queen
supreme reads it to herself, silent, and slips the postcard into her
handbag. Princess Princess, she says, "At this rate, we'll never get to
the future.”
the fluorescent light coming through in broken exploded bits.
"Veils," Brandy says as each color settles over me. "You need to
look like you're keeping secrets," she says. "If you're going to do
the outside world, Miss St. Patience, you need to not let people see
your face," she says.
"You can go anywhere in the world," Brandy goes on and on.
You just can't let people know who you really are.
"You can live a completely normal, regular life," she says.
You just can't let anybody get close enough to you to learn the
truth.
"In a word," she says, "veils."
Take-charge princess who she is, Brandy Alexander never does
ask my real name. The name who I was born. Miss Bossy Pants right
away gives me a new name, a new past. She invents another future
for me with no connections, except to her, a cult all by herself.
"Your name is Daisy St. Patience," she tells me. "You're the
lost heiress to the House of St. Patience, the very haute couture
fashion showroom, and this season we're doing hats," she says.
"Hats with veils."
I ask her, "Jsfssjf ciacb sxi?"
"You come from escaped French aristocrat blood," Brandy says.

"Gwdcn aixa gklgfnv?"
"You grew up in Paris, and went to a school run by nuns,"
Brandy says.
Give me homesickness.
Flash.
Give me nostalgic childhood yearnings.
Flash.
What's the word for the opposite of glamour?
Brandy never asked about my folks, were they living or dead, and
why weren't they here to gnash their teeth.
"Your father and mother, Rainier and Honoraria St. Patience,
were assassinated by fashion terrorists," she says.
B.B., before Brandy, my father took his pigs to market every fall.
His secret is to spend all summer driving his flatbed truck around
Idaho and the other upper, left-hand corner states, stopping at all
the day-old bakery outlets selling expired snack foods, individual
fruit pies and cupcakes with creamy fillings, little loaves of sponge
cake injected with artificial whipped cream and lumps of devil's
food cake covered with marshmallow and shredded coconut dyed
pink. Old birthday cakes that didn't sell. Stale cakes wishing
Congratulations. Happy Mother's Day. Be My Valentine. My father
still brings it all home, heaped in a dense sticky pile or heat-sealed
inside cellophane. That's the hardest part, opening these
thousands of old snacks and dropping them to the pigs.
My father who Brandy didn't want to hear about, his secret is to
feed the pigs these pies and cakes and snacks the last two weeks
before they go to market. The snacks have no nutrition, and the
pigs gobble them until there isn't an expired snack left within five
hundred miles.
These snacks don't have any real fiber to them so every fall,
every three-hundred-pound pig goes to market with an extra
ninety pounds in its colon. My father makes a fortune at auction,
and who knows how long after that, but the pigs all take a big
sugary crap when they see inside whatever slaughterhouse where
they end up.
I say, "Kwvne wivnuw fw sojaoa."
"No," Brandy says and puts up her foot-long index finger, six
cocktail rings stacked on just this one finger, and she presses her
jeweled hotdog up and down across my mouth the moment I try
and say anything.
"Not a word," Brandy says. "You're still too connected to your
past. Your saying anything is pointless."
From out of her sewing basket, Brandy draws a streamer of white
and gold, a magic act, a layer of sheer white silk patterned with a
Greek key design in gold she casts over my head.
Behind another veil, the real world is that much farther away.
"Guess how they do the gold design," Brandy says.
The fabric is so light my breath blows it out in front; the silk
lays across my eyelashes without bending them. Even my face, where
every nerve in your body comes to an end, even my face can't feel
it.
It takes a team of kids in India, Brandy says, four- and five-year-old
kids sitting all day on wooden benches, being vegetarians, they have to
tweeze out most of about a zillion gold threads to leave the pattern of
just the gold left behind.
"You don't see kids any older than ten doing this job," Brandy
says, "because by then most kids go blind."

Just the veil Brandy takes out of her basket must be six feet
square. The precious eyesight of all those darling children, lost. The
precious days of their fragile childhood spent tweezing silk threads
out.
Give me pity.
Flash.
Give me empathy.
Flash.
Oh, I wish I could make my poor heart just bust.
I say, "Vswf siws cm eiuvn sines."
No, it's okay, Brandy says. She doesn't want to reward anybody
for exploiting children. She got it on sale.
Caged behind my silk, settled inside my cloud of organza and
georgette, the idea that I can't share my problems with other people
makes me not give a shit about their problems.
"Oh, and don't worry," Brandy says. "You'll still get attention.
You have a dynamite tits and ass combo. You just can't talk to
anybody."
People just can't stand not knowing something, she tells me.
Especially men can't bear not climbing every mountain, mapping
everywhere. Labeling everything. Peeing on every tree and then
never calling you back.
"Behind a veil, you're the great unknown," she says. "Most guys
will fight to know you. Some guys will deny you're a real person,
and some will just ignore you.”
The zealot. The atheist. The agnostic.
Even if somebody is only wearing an eye patch, you always want
to look. To see if he's faking. The man in the Hathaway Shirt. Or to
see the horror underneath.
The photographer in my head says:
Give me a voice.
Flash.
Give me a face.
Brandy's answer was little hats with veils. And big hats with veils.
Pancake hats and pillbox hats edged all around with clouds of tulle
and gauze. Parachute silk or heavy crepe or dense net dotted with
chenille pompoms.
"The most boring thing in the entire world," Brandy says, "is
nudity."
The second most boring thing, she says, is honesty.
"Think of this as a tease. It's lingerie for your face," she says. "A
peekaboo nightgown you wear over your whole identity."
The third most boring thing in the entire world is your sorry-assed
past. So Brandy never asked me anything. Bulldozer alpha bitch she
can be, we meet again and again in the speech therapist office
and Brandy tells me everything I need to know about myself.
CHAPTER T E N
Jump to Brandy Alexander tucking me into a Seattle bed.
This is the night of the Space Needle, the night the future doesn't
happen. Brandy, she's wearing yards and yards of black tulle
wrapped around her legs, twisted up and around her hourglass
waist. Black veil crosses her torpedo breasts and loops up and over
the top of her auburn hair. All this sparkle that bends over beside
my bed could be the trial-sized mock-up for the original summer
night sky.
Little rhinestones, not the plastic ones pooped out by a factory

in Calcutta but the Austrian crystal ones cut by elves in the Black
Forest, these little star-shaped rhinestones are set all over the black
tulle. The queen supreme's face is the moon in the night sky that
bends over and kisses me good night. My hotel room is dark, and
the television at the foot of my bed is turned on so the handmade
stars twinkle in all the colors the television is trying to show us.
Seth's right, the television does make me God. I can look in on
anybody and every hour the lives change. Here in the real world,
that's not always the case.
"I will always love you," the queen of the night sky says, and I
know which postcard she's found.
The hotel sheets feel the same as the hospital sheets. This is
thousands of miles since we met, and the big fingers of Brandy are
still smoothing the blankets under where my chin used to be. My
face is the last thing the go-go boys and girls want to meet when
they go into a dark alley looking to buy drugs.
Brandy says, "We'll be back as soon as we sell out."
Seth is silhouetted in the open doorway to the hall. How he
looks from my bed is the terrific outline of a superhero against the
neon green and gray and pink tropical leaves of the hallway
wallpaper. His coat, the long black leather coat Seth wears, is
fitted tight until the waist and then flares from there down so in
outline you think it's a cape.
And maybe when he kisses Brandy Alexander's royal butt he's
not just pretending. Maybe it's the two of them in love when I'm
not around. This wouldn't be the first time I've lost him.
The face surrounded in black veil that leans over me is a
surprise of color. The skin is a lot of pink around a Plumbago
mouth, and the eyes are too aubergine. Even these colors are
too garish right now, too saturated, too intense. Lurid. You
think of cartoon characters. Fashion dolls have pink skin like
this, like plastic bandages. Flesh tone. Too aubergine eyes,
cheekbones too defined by Rusty Rose blusher. Nothing is left
to your imagination.
Maybe this is what guys want. I just want Brandy
Alexander to leave.
I want Seth's belt around my neck. I want Seth's fingers in
my mouth and his hands pulling my knees apart and then his
wet fingers prying me open.
"If you want something to read," Brandy says, "that Miss
Rona Barrett book is in my room. I can run get it."
I want to be rubbed so raw by the stubble around Seth's
mouth that it will hurt when I pee.
Seth says, "Are you coming?"
A ring-beaded hand tosses the television remote control
onto the bed.
"Come on, Princess Princess," Seth says. "The night's not
getting any younger."
And I want Seth dead. Worse than dead, I want him fat
and bloated with water and insecure and emotional. If Seth
doesn't want me, I want to not want him.
"If the police or anything happens," the moon tells me,
"the money is all in my make-up case."
The one I love is already gone out to warm up the car.
The one who will love me forever says, "Sleep tight," and closes
the door behind her.
Jump to once a long time ago, Manus, my fiance who dumped

me, Manus Kelley, the police detective, he told me that your folks
are like God because you want to know they're out there and you
want them to approve of your life, still you only call them when
you're in crisis and need something.
Jump back to me in bed in Seattle, alone with the TV remote
control I hit a button on and make the television mute.
On television are three or four people in chairs sitting on a low
stage in front of a television audience. This is on television like an

infomercial, but as the camera zooms in on each person for a close-
up, a little caption appears across the person's chest. Each caption

on each close-up is a first name followed by three or four words like
a last name, the sort of literal who-they-really-are last names that
Indians give to each other, but instead of Heather Runs With Bison
. . . Trisha Hunts By Moonlight, these names are:
Cristy Drank Human Blood
Roger Lived With Dead Mother
Brenda Ate Her Baby
I change channels.
I change channels.
I change channels and here are another three people:
Gwen Works As Hooker
Neville Was Raped In Prison
Brent Slept With His Father
People are all over the world telling their one dramatic
story and how their life has turned into getting over this
one event. Now their lives are more about the past than
their future. I hit a button and give Gwen WorksAsHooker
her voice back for a little soundbite of prostitute talk.
Gwen shapes her story with her hands as she talks. She
leans forward out of her chair. Her eyes are watching
something up and to the right, just off camera. I know it's the
monitor. Gwen's watching herself tell her story.
Gwen balls her fingers until only the left index finger is
out, and she slowly twists her hand to show both sides of her
fingernail as she talks.
" . . . to protect themselves, most girls on the street break
off a little bit of razor blade and glue it under their
fingernail. Girls paint the razor nail so it looks like a regular
fingernail." Here, Gwen sees something in the monitor. She
frowns and tosses her red hair back off what look like pearl
earrings.
"When they go to jail," Gwen tells herself in the monitor,
"or when they're not attractive anymore, some girls use the
razor nails to slash their wrists.”
I make Gwen WorksAsHooker mute again.
I change channels.
I change channels.
I change channels.
Sixteen channels away, a beautiful young woman in a
sequined dress is smiling and dropping animal wastes into a
Num. Num Snack Factory.
Evie and me, we did this infomercial. It's one of those
television commercials you think is a real program except it's
just a thirty-minute pitch. The television camera cuts to
another girl in a sequined dress, this one is wading through
an audience of snow birds and Midwest tourists. The girl

offers a golden anniversary couple in matching Hawaiian
shirts a selection of canapes from a silver tray, but the couple
and everybody else in their double knits and camera
necklaces, they're staring up and to the right at something
off camera.
You know it's the monitor.
It's eerie, but what's happening is the folks are staring at
themselves in the monitor staring at themselves in the
monitor staring at themselves in the monitor, on and on,
completely trapped in a reality loop that never ends.
The girl with the tray, her desperate eyes are contact lens
too green and her lips are heavy red outside the natural lip
line. The blonde hair is thick and teased up so the girl's
shoulders don't look so big-boned. The canapes she keeps
waving under all the old noses are soda crackers pooped on
with meat by-products. Waving her tray, the girl wades further
up into the studio audience bleachers with her too green eyes and
big-boned hair. This is my best friend, Evie Cottrell.
This has to be Evie because here comes Manus stepping up to save
her with his good looks. Manus, special police vice operative that he
is, he takes one of those pooped-on soda crackers and puts it
between his capped teeth. And chews. And tilts his handsome

square-jawed face back and closes his eyes, Manus closes his power-
blue eyes and twists his head just so much side to side and swallows.

Thick black hair like Manus has, it reminds you how people's
hair is just vestigial fur with mousse on it. Such a sexy hair dog,
Manus is.
The square-jawed face rocks down to give the camera a full-face
eyes-open look of complete and total love and satisfaction. So deja
vu. This was exactly the same look Manus used to give me when
he'd ask if I got my orgasm.
Then Manus turns to give the exact same look to Evie while the
studio audience all looks off in another direction, watching
themselves watch themselves watch themselves watch Manus smile
with total and complete love and satisfaction at Evie.
Evie smiles back her red outside the natural lipline smile at
Manus, and I'm this tiny sparkling figure in the background. That's
me just over Manus's shoulder, tiny me smiling away like a space
heater and dropping animal matter into the Plexiglas funnel on top
of the Num Num Snack Factory.
How could I be so dumb.
Let's go sailing.
Sure.
I should've known the deal was Manus and Evie all the time.
Even here, lying in a hotel bed a year after the whole story is
over, I'm making fists. I could've just watched the stupid infomercial
and known Manus and Evie had some tortured sick relationship
they wanted to think was true love.
Okay, I did watch it. Okay, about a hundred times I watched it,
but I was only watching myself. That reality loop thing.
The camera comes back to the first girl, the one on stage, and
she's me. And I'm so beautiful. On television, I demonstrate the easy
cleanability of the snack factory, and I'm so beautiful. I snap the
blades out of the Plexiglas cover and rinse off the chewed-up animal
waste under running water. And, jeez, I'm beautiful.
The disembodied voiceover is saying how the Num Num Snack
Factory takes meat by-products, whatever you have—your tongues

or hearts or lips or genitals—chews them up, seasons them, and
poops them out in the shape of a spade or a diamond or a club
onto your choice of cracker for you to eat yourself. Here in bed, I'm
crying.
Bubba-Joan GotHerJawShotOff.
All these thousands of miles later, all these different
people I've been, and it's still the same story. Why is it you feel
like a dope if you laugh alone, but that's usually how you end
up crying? How is it you can keep mutating and still be the
same deadly virus?

CHAPTER E L E V E N
Jump back to when I first got out of the hospital without a
career or a fiance or an apartment, and I had to sleep at Evie's big
house, her real house where even she didn't like to live, it was so
lonely, stuck way out in some rainforest with nobody paying
attention.
Jump to me being on Evie's bed, on my back that first night, but
I can't sleep.
Wind lifts the curtains, lace curtains. All Evie's furniture is that
curlicue Frenchy provincial stuff painted white and gold. There
isn't a moon, but the sky is full of stars, so everything—Evie's house,
the rose hedges, the bedroom curtains, the backs of my hands
against the bedspread—are all either black or gray.
Evie's house was what a Texas girl would buy if her parents
kept giving her about ten million dollars all the time. It's like
the Cottrells know Evie will never make the big-time runways.
So Evie, she lives here. Not New York. Not Milan. The suburbs,
right out in the nowhere of professional modeling. This is
pretty far from doing the Paris collections. Being stuck in

nowhere is the excuse Evie needs, living here is, for a big-
boned girl who'd never be a big-time success anywhere.

The doors are locked tonight. The cat is inside. When I look,
the cat looks back at me the way dogs and some cars look
when people say they're smiling.
Just that afternoon, Evie was on the telephone begging
me to check myself out of the hospital and come visit.
Evie's house was big—white with hunter green shutters,
a three-story plantation house fronted with big pillars.
Needlepoint ivy and climbing roses—yellow roses— were
climbed up around the bottom ten feet of each big pillar.
You'd imagine Ashley Wilkes mowing the grass here, or Rhett
Butler taking down the storm windows, but Evie, she has
these minimum-wage slave Laotians who refuse to live in.
Jump to the day before, Evie driving me from the hospital.
Evie really is Evelyn Cottrell, Inc. No, really. She's traded
publicly now. Everybody's favorite write-off. The Cottrells

made a private stock offering in her career when Evie was twenty-
one, and all the Cottrell relatives with their Texas land and oil

money are heavily invested in Evie's being a model failure.
Most times it was an embarrassment going to modeling look-see
auditions with Evie. Sure, I'd get work, but then the art director or
the stylist would start screaming at Evie that, no, in his expert
opinion she was not a perfect size six. Most times, some assistant
stylist had to wrestle Evie out the door. Evie would be screaming

back over her shoulder about how I shouldn't let them treat me
like a piece of meat. I should just walk out.
"Fuck 'em," Evie's screaming by this point. "Fuck 'em all."
Me, I'm not angry. I'd be getting strapped into this incredible
leather corset by Poopie Cadole and leather pants by Chrome
Hearts. Life was good back then. I'd have three hours of work,
maybe four or five.
At the photo studio doorway, before she'd get thrown out of
the shoot, Evie would swing the assistant stylist into the door
jamb, and the little guy would just crumple up at her feet. It's then
Evie would scream, "You people can all suck the crap out of my
sweet Texas ass." Then she'd go out to her Ferrari and wait the
three or four or five hours so she could drive me home.
Evie, that Evie was my best friend in the whole world. Moments
like that, Evie was fun and quirky, almost like she had a life of her
own.
Okay, so I didn't know about Evie and Manus and their complete
and total love and satisfaction. So kill me.
Jump to before that, Evie calling me at the hospital and
begging me, please, could I discharge myself and come stay at her
house, she was so lonely, please.
My health insurance had a two-million-dollar lifetime ceiling,
and the meter had just run and run all summer. No social service
contact had the guts to transition me into God only knows where.
Begging me on the telephone, Evie said she had plane
reservations. She was going to Cancun for a catalogue shoot so
would I, could I, please, just house-sit for her?
When she picked me up, on my pad I wrote:
is that my halter top? you know you're stretching it.
"You'll need to feed my cat is all," Evie says.
i don't like being alone so far out from town, I write, i don't
know how you can live here.
Evie says, "It's not living alone if you keep a rifle under the bed."
I write:
i know girls who say that about their dildos.
And Evie says, "Gross! I'm not that way at all with my rifle!”
So jump to Evie being flown off to Cancun, Mexico, and
when I go to look under her bed, there's the thirty-aught rifle
and scope. In her closets are what's left of my clothes, stretched
and tortured to death and hanging there on wire hangers,
dead.
Then jump to me in Evie's bed that night. It's midnight.
The wind lifts the bedroom curtains, lace curtains, and the cat
jumps up on the windowsill to see who's just pulled up in the
gravel driveway. With the stars behind it, the cat looks back at
me. Downstairs, you hear a window break.
CHAPTER T W E L V E
Jump way back to the last Christmas before my accident, when I
go home to open presents with my folks. My folks put up the same

fake tree every year, scratchy green and making that hot poly-
plastic smell that gives you a dizzy flu headache when the lights are

plugged in too long. The tree's all magic and sparkle, crowded with
our red and gold glass ornaments and those strands of silver plastic
loaded with static electricity that people call icicles. It's the same
ratty angel with a rubber doll face on top of the tree. Covering the
mantel is the same spun fiberglass angel hair that works into your

skin and gives you an infected rash if you even touch it. It's the
same Perry Como Christmas album on the stereo. This is back when
I still had a face so I wasn't so confronted by singing Christmas
carols.
My brother Shane's still dead so I try not to expect much
attention, just a quiet Christmas. By this point, my boyfriend,
Manus was getting weird about losing his police job, and what I
needed was a couple days out of the spotlight. We all talked, my
mom, my dad, and me, and agreed to not buy big gifts for each
other this year. Maybe just little gifts, my folks say, just stocking
stuffers.
Perry Como is singing "It's Beginning to Look a Lot Like
Christmas."
The red felt stockings my mom sewed for each of us, for Shane
and me, are hanging on the fireplace, each one red felt with our
names spelled out, top to bottom, in fancy white felt letters. Each
one lumpy with the gifts stuffed inside. It's Christmas morning,
and we're all sitting around the tree, my father ready with his

jackknife for the knotted ribbons. My mom has a brown paper shop-
ping bag and says, "Before things get out of hand, the wrapping

paper goes in here, not all over the place."
My mom and dad sit in recliner chairs. I sit on the floor in front of
the fireplace with the stockings by me. This scene is always blocked
this way. Them sitting with coffee, leaned down over me, watching
for my reaction. Me Indian-sitting on the floor. All of us in
bathrobes and pajamas still.
Perry Como is singing "I'll Be Home for Christmas."
The first thing out of my stocking is a little stuffed koala
bear, the kind that grips your pencil with its spring-loaded
hands and feet. This is who my folks think I am. My mom
hands me hot chocolate in a mug with miniature
marshmallows floating on top. I say, "Thanks." Under the
little koala is a box I take out.
My folks stop everything, lean over their cups of coffee, and
just watch me.
Perry Como is singing "Oh, Come, All Ye Faithful."
The little box is condoms.
Sitting right next to our sparkling, magic Christmas tree,
my father says, "We don't know how many partners you have
every year, but we want you to play safe."
I stash the condoms in my bathrobe pocket and look down
at the miniature marshmallows melting. I say, "Thanks."
"Those are latex," says my mom. "You need to use only a
water-based sexual lubricant. If you need a lubricant at your
age. Not petroleum jelly or shortenings or any kind of lotion."
She says, "We didn't get you the kind made from sheep
intestines because those have tiny pores that can allow the
transmission of HIV."
Next inside my stocking is another little box. This is more
condoms. The color marked on the box is Nude. This seems
redundant. Next to that, the label says odorless and tasteless.
Oh, I could tell you all about tasteless.

"A study," my father says, "a telephone survey of het-
erosexuals in urban areas with a high incidence of HIV

infection showed that thirty-five percent of people are
uncomfortable buying their own condoms."
And getting them from Santa Claus is better? I say, "Got it."

"This isn't just about AIDS," my mom says. "There's gonorrhea.
There's syphilis. There's the human papilloma virus. That's genital
warts." She says, "You do know to put the condom on as soon as the
penis is erect, don't you?"
She says, "I paid a fortune for bananas out of season in case you
need the practice."
This is a trap. If I say, Oh, yeah, I roll rubbers onto new dry
erections all the time, I'll get the slut lecture from my father. But if I
tell them, No, we'll get to spend Christmas Day practicing to protect
me from fruit.
My dad says, "There's tons more to this than AIDS." He says,
"There's the herpes simplex virus II with symptoms that include
small painful blisters that burst on your genitals." He looks at Mom.
"Body aches," she says.
"Yes, you get body aches," he says, "and fever. You get vaginal
discharge. It hurts to urinate." He looks at my mom.
Perry Como is singing "Santa Claus Is Coming to Town."
Under the next box of condoms is another box of condoms.
Jeez, three boxes should last me right into menopause.
Jump to how much I want my brother alive right now so I can
kill him for wrecking my Christmas. Perry Como is singing "Up
on the Housetop."
"There's hepatitis B," my mom says. To my dad, she says,
"What's the others?"
"Chlamydia," my father says. "And lymphogranuloma."
"Yes," my rnom says, "and mucal purulent cervicitis and
nongonococcal urethritis."
My dad looks at my mom and says, "But that's usually
caused by an allergy to a latex condom or a spermicide."
My mom drinks some coffee. She looks down at both her
hands around her cup, then looks up at me sitting here.
"What your father's trying to say," she says, "is we realize
now that we made some mistakes with your brother." She says,
"We're just trying to keep you safe."
There's a fourth box of condoms in my stocking. Perry
Como is singing "It Came upon a Midnight Clear." The box is
labeled . .. safe and strong enough even for prolonged anal
intercourse. . . .
"There's granuloma inguinale," my father says to my
mother, "and bacterial vaginosis." He opens one hand and
counts the fingers, then counts them again, then says,
"there's molluscum contagiosum."
Some of the condoms are white. Some are assorted colors.
Some are ribbed to feel like serrated bread knives, I guess.
Some are extra large. Some glow in the dark. This is flattering
in a creepy way. My folks must think I'm wildly popular.
Perry Como is singing "Oh Come, Oh Come,
Emmanuel."
"We don't want to scare you," my mom says, "but you're
young. We can't expect you to just sit home nights."
"And if you ever can't sleep," my father says, "it could be
pinworms."
My mom says, "We just don't want you to end up like your
brother is all."
My brother's dead, but he still has a stocking full of
presents and you can bet they're not rubbers. He's dead, but
you can bet he's laughing his head off right now.

"With pinworms," my father says, "the females
migrate down the colon to the perianal area to lay their eggs
at night." He says, "If you suspect worm activity, it works best
to press clear adhesive tape against the rectum, then look at
the tape under a magnifying glass. The worms should be
about a quarter-inch long."
My mom says, "Bob, hush."
My dad leans toward me and says, "Ten percent of the men
in this country can give you these worms." He says, "You just
remember that."
Almost everything in my stocking is condoms, in boxes, in
little gold foil coins, in long strips of a hundred with
perforations so you can tear them apart. My only other gifts
are a rape whistle and a pocket-sized spray canister of Mace.
That looks like I'm set for the worst, but I'm afraid to ask if
there's more. There could be a vibrator to keep me at home
and celibate every night. There could be dental dams in case
of cunnilingus. Saran Wrap. Rubber gloves.
Perry Como is singing "Nuttin' for Christmas."
I look at Shane's stocking still lumpy with presents and ask,
"You guys bought for Shane?"
If it's condoms, they're a little late.
My mom and dad look at each other. To my mom, my dad
says, "You tell her."
"That's what you got for your brother," my mom says. "Go
ahead and look."
Jump to me being being confused as hell
Give me clarity. Give me reasons. Give me answers.
Flash.
I reach up to unhook Shane's stocking from the mantel,
and inside it's filled with crumpled tissue paper.
"Keep digging," my dad says.
In with the tissue, there's a sealed envelope.
"Open it," my mom says.
Inside the envelope is a printed letter with right at the
top the words "Thank You."
"It's really a gift to both our children," my dad says.
I can't believe what I'm reading.
"Instead of buying you a big present," my mom says, "we
made a donation in your name to the World AIDS Research
Fund."
Inside the stocking is a second letter I take out.
"That," my dad says, "is Shane's present to you."
Oh, this is too much.
Perry Como is singing "I Saw Mommy Kissing Santa Claus."
I say, "That crafty old dead brother of mine, he's so
thoughtful." I say, "He shouldn't have. He really, really shouldn't
have gone to all this trouble. He needs to maybe move away from
denial and coping and just get on with being dead. Maybe
reincarnate." I say, "His pretending he's still alive can't be
healthy."
Inside, I'm ranting. What I really wanted this year was a new
Prada handbag. It wasn't my fault that some hair-spray can
exploded in Shane's face. Boom, and he came staggering into the
house with his forehead already turning black and blue. The long
drive to the hospital with his one eye swoll shut and the face around
it just getting bigger and bigger with every vein inside broken and

bleeding under the skin, Shane didn't say a word.
It wasn't my fault how the social service people at the hospital
took one look at Shane's face and came down on my father with
both feet. Suspicion of child abuse. Criminal neglect. Family
intervention. It wasn't any of it my fault. Police statements. A
caseworker went around interviewing our neighbors, our school
friends, our teachers until everybody we knew treated me like, you
poor brave thing.
Sitting here Christmas morning with all these gifts I need a penis
to enjoy, everybody doesn't know the half of it.
Even after the police investigation was done, and nothing was
proved, even then, our family was wrecked. And everybody still
thinks I'm the one who threw away the hair-spray. And since I
started this, it was all my fault. The explosion. The police.
Shane's running away. His death.
And it wasn't my fault.
"Really," I say, "if Shane really wanted to give me a
present, he'd come back from the dead and buy me the new
wardrobe he owes me. That would give me a merry Christmas.
That I could really say 'thank you' for."
Silence.
As I fish out the second envelope, my mom says, "We're
officially 'outing' you."
"In your brother's name," my dad says, "we bought you a
membership in P.F.L.A.G.
"Fee-flag?" I say.
"Parents and Friends of Lesbians and Gays," my mom says.
Perry Como is singing "There's No Place Like Home for the
Holidays."
Silence.
My mother starts up from her chair and says, "I'll go run
get those bananas." She says, "Just to be on the safe side,
your father and I can't wait to see you try on some of your
presents.”
CHAPTER T H I R T E E N
Jump to around midnight in Evie's house where I catch Seth
Thomas trying to kill me.
The way my face is without a jaw, my throat just ends in sort of
a hole with my tongue hanging out. Around the hole, the skin is all
scar tissue: dark red lumps and shiny the way you'd look if you got
the cherry pie in a pie eating contest. If I let my tongue hang down,
you can see the roof of my mouth, pink arid smooth as the inside
of a crab's back, and hanging down around the roof is the white
vertebrae horseshoe of the upper teeth I have left. There are times
to wear a veil and there are not. Other than this, I'm stunning
when I meet Seth Thomas breaking into Evie's big house at
midnight.
What Seth sees coming down the big circular staircase in
Evie's foyer is me wearing one of Evie's peachy-pink satin and
lace peignoir sets pieced on the bias. Evie's bathrobe is this
peachy-pink retro Zsa Zsa number that hides me the way
cellophane hides a frozen turkey. At the cuffs and along the
front of the bathrobe is the peachy-pink ozone haze of
ostrich feathers that match the feathers on the high-heeled
mules I'm wearing.

Seth is just frozen at the foot of Evie's big circular staircase
with Evie's best sixteen-inch carving knife in his hand. A pair
of Evie's control top pantyhose is pulled down over Seth's
head. You can see Evie's hygienic cotton crotch sitting across
Seth's face. The pantyhose legs drape the way a cocker spaniel's

ears would look down the front of his otherwise mix-and-
match army fatigues ensemble.

And I am a vision. Descending step by step toward the
point of the carving knife, with the slow step-pause-step of a
showgirl in a big Vegas revue.
Oh, I am just that fabulous. So sex furniture.
Seth's standing there, looking up, having a moment,
afraid for the first time in his life because I'm holding Evie's
rifle. The butt is planted against my shoulder, and the barrel
is out in both hands in front of me. The sight's cross-haired
right in the middle of Evie Cottrell's cotton crotch.
This is just Seth and me in Evie's foyer with its beveled glass
windows broken around the front door and Evie's Austrian
crystal chandelier that sparkles like so much costume jewelry for
a house. The only other thing is a little desk in that Frenchy
provincial white and gold.
On the little French desk is a tres ooh-la-la telephone where
the receiver is as big as a gold saxophone and sits in a gold cradle
on top of an ivory box. In the middle of the push-button circle is a
cameo. So chic, Evie probably thinks.
With the knife out in front of him, Seth goes, "I'm not going to
hurt you."
I'm doing that slow step-pause-step down the stairs.
Seth says, "Let's not anybody get killed, here."
And it's so deja vu.
This was the exact way Manus Kelley would ask if I'd gotten my
orgasm. Not the words, but the voice.
Seth says through Evie's crotch, "All's I did was sleep with Evie."
So deja vu.
Let's go sailing. It's the exact same voice.
Seth drops the carving knife and the tip of the blade sticks
mumblety-peg straight down next to his combat boot in Evie's
foyer parquet floor. Seth says, "If Evie says it was me that shot you,
she was lying."
On the desk next to the telephone is a pad and pencil for
taking down messages.
Seth says, "I knew the second I heard about you in the hospital
that it was Evie's doing."
Balancing the rifle with one arm, on the pad, I write:
take off your pantyhose.
"I mean you can't kill me," Seth says. Seth's pulling at the
waistband of his pantyhose. "I'm just the reason why Evie shot
you."
I step-pause-step the last ten feet to Seth and hook the
end of the rifle barrel on the pantyhose waistband and pull
them off Seth's square-jawed face. Seth Thomas who would be
Alfa Romeo in Vancouver, British Columbia. Alfa Romeo who
was Nash Rambler, formerly Bergdorf Goodman, formerly
Neiman Marcus, formerly Saks Fifth Avenue, formerly Christian
Dior.
Seth Thomas who a long time before was named Manus
Kelley, my fiance from the infomercial. I couldn't tell you this

until now because I want you to know how discovering this
felt. In my heart. My fiance wanted to kill me. Even when
he's that much an asshole, I loved Manus. I still love Seth. A
knife, it felt like a knife, and I'd discovered that despite
everything that's happened, I still had an endless untapped
potential for getting hurt.
It's from this night we started on the road together and
Manus Kelley would someday become Seth Thomas. In
between, in Santa Barbara and San Francisco and Los Angles
and Reno and Boise and Salt Lake City, Manus was other
men. Between that night and now, tonight, me in bed in
Seattle still in love with him, Seth was Lance Corporal and
Chase Manhattan. He was Dow Corning and Herald Tribune
and Morris Code.
All courtesy of the Brandy Alexander Witness
Reincarnation Project, as she calls it.
Different names, but all these men started out as Manus
TryingToKillMe.
Different men, but there's always the same special police
vice operative good looks. The same power blue eyes. Don't
shoot—Let's go sailing—it's the same voice. Different haircuts
but it's always the same thick black sexy dog hair.
Seth Thomas is Manus. Manus cheated on me with Evie,
but I still love him so much I'll hide any amount of conjugated
estrogen in his food. So much I'll do anything to destroy him.
You'd think I'd be smarter now after, what? Sixteen
hundred college credits. I should be smarter. I could be a
doctor by now.
Sorry, Mom. Sorry, God.

Jump to me not feeling anything but stupid, trying to bal-
ance one of Evie's gold saxophone telephones against my ear.

Brandy Alexander, the inconvenient queen she is, isn't listed in
the phone book. All I know is she lives downtown at the
Congress Hotel in a corner suite with three roommates:
Kitty Litter.
Sofonda Peters.
And the vivacious Vivienne VaVane.
AKA the Rhea sisters, three drag guys who worship the
quality queen deluxe but would kill each other for more closet
space. The Brandy queen told me that much.
It should be Brandy I talk to, but I call my folks. What's gone
on is I lock my killer fiance in the coat closet, and when I go
to put him inside there's more of my beautiful clothes but all
stretched out three sizes. Those clothes were every penny I
ever made. After all that, I have to call somebody.
For so many reasons, no way can I just go back to bed. So I
call, and my call goes out across mountains and deserts to
where my father answers, and in my best ventriloquist voice,
avoiding the consonants you really need a jaw to say, I tell him,
"Gflerb sorlfd qortk, erd sairk. Srd. Erd, korts derk sairk?
Kirdo!"
Anymore, the telephone is just not my friend.
And my father says, "Please don't hang up. Let me get my
wife."
Away from the receiver, he says, "Leslie, wake up, we're
being hate-crimed finally."
And in the background is my mother's voice saying, "Don't

even talk to them. Tell them we loved and treasured our dead
homosexual child."
It's the middle of the night here. They must be in bed.
"Lot. Ordilj," I say. "Serta ish ka alt. Serta ish ka alt!"
"Here," my father says as his voice drifts away. "Leslie, you
give them what for."
The gold saxophone receiver feels heavy and stagy, a
prop, as if this call needs any more drama. From back in the coat
closet, Seth yells, "Please. Don't be calling the police until you've
talked to Evie."
Then from the telephone, "Hello?" And it's my mother.
"The world is big enough we can all love each other." she says,
"There's room in God's heart for all His children. Gay, lesbian,
bisexual, and transgendered. Just because it's anal intercourse
doesn't mean it's not love."
She says, "I hear a lot of hurt from you. I want to help you deal
with these issues."
And Seth yells, "I wasn't going to kill you. I was here to
confront Evie because of what she did to you. I was only trying to
protect myself."
On the telephone, a two-hour drive from here, there's a toilet
flush, then my father's voice, "You still talking to those lunatics?"
And my mother, "It's so exciting! I think one of them says he's
going to kill us."
And Seth yells, "It had to be Evie who shot you."
Then in the telephone is my father's voice, roaring so loud that I
have to hold the receiver away from my ear, he says, "You, you're the
one who should be dead." He says, "You killed my son, you
goddamned perverts."
And Seth yells, "What I had with Evie was just sex."
I might as well not even be in the room, or just hand the
phone to Seth.
Seth says, "Please don't think for one minute that I could just
stab you in your sleep.”
And in the phone, my father shouts, "You just try it,
mister. I've got a gun here and I'll keep it loaded and next to
me day and night." He says, "We're through letting you
torture us." He says, "We're proud to be the parents of a
dead gay son."
And Seth yells, "Please, just put the phone down."
And I go, "Aht! Oahk!"
But my father hangs up.
My inventory of people who can save me is down to just
me. Not my best friend. Or my old boyfriend. Not the doctors
or the nuns. Maybe the police, but not yet. It isn't time to
wrap this whole mess into a neat legal package and get on
with my less-than life. Hideous and invisible forever and
picking up pieces.
Things are still all messy and up in the air, but I'm not
ready to settle them. My comfort zone was getting bigger by
the minute. My threshold for drama was bumping out. It was
time to keep pushing the envelope. It felt like I could do
anything, and I was only getting started.
My rifle was loaded, and I had my first hostage.

CHAPTER F O U R T E E N
Jump way back to the last time I ever went home to see
my parents. It was my last birthday before the accident. What
with Shane still being dead, I wasn't expecting presents. I'm
not expecting a cake. This last time, I go home just to see
them, my folks. This is when I still have a mouth so I'm not so
stymied by the idea of blowing out candles.
The house, the brown living room sofa and reclining
chairs, everything is the same except my father's put big Xs of
duct tape across the inside of all the windows. Mom's car
isn't in the driveway where they usually park it. The car's
locked in the garage. There's a big deadbolt I don't remember
being on the front door. On the front gate is a big "Beware of
Dog" sign and a smaller sign for a home security system.
When I first get home, Mom waves me inside fast and says,

"Stay back from the windows, Bump. Hate crimes are up sixty-
seven percent this year over last year."

She says, "After it gets dark at night, try and not let your
shadow fall across the blinds so it can be seen from outside."
She cooks dinner by flashlight. When I open the oven or
the fridge, she panics fast, body blocking me to one side and
closing whatever I open.
"It's the bright light inside," she says. "Anti-gay violence
is up over one hundred percent in the last five years."
My father comes home and parks his car a half block
away. His keys rattle against the outside of the new dead-bolt
while Mom stands frozen in the kitchen doorway, holding me
back. The keys stop, and my father knocks, three fast knocks,
then two slow ones.
"That's his knock," Mom says, "but look through the
peephole, anyway."
My father comes in, looking back over his shoulder to the
dark street, watching. A car passes, and he says, "Romeo
Tango Foxtrot six seven four. Quick, write it down."
My mother writes this on the pad by the phone.
"Make?" she says. "Model?"
"Mercury, blue," my father says. "Sable.”
Mom says, "It's on the record."
I say maybe they're overreacting some.
And my father says, "Don't marginalize our oppression."
Jump to what a big mistake this was, coming home. Jump
to how Shane should see this, how weird our folks are being.
My father turns off the lamp I turned on in the living room.
The drapes on the picture window are shut and pinned
together in the middle. They know all the furniture in the
dark, but me, I stumble against every chair and end table. I
knock a candy dish to the floor, smash, and my mother screams
and drops to the kitchen linoleum.
My father comes up from where he's crouched behind the
sofa and says, "You'll have to cut your mother some slack.
We're expecting to get hate-crimed any day soon."
From the kitchen, Mom yells, "Was it a rock? Is anything
on fire?"
And my father yells, "Don't press the panic button, Leslie.
The next false alarm, and we have to start paying for them."

Now I know why they put a headlight on some kinds of
vacuum cleaners. First, I'm picking up broken glass in the pitch
dark. Then I'm asking my father for bandages. I just stand in
one place, keeping my cut hand raised above my heart, and
wait. My father comes out of the dark with alcohol and
bandages.

"This is a war we're fighting," he says, "all of us in pee-
flag.”

P.F.L.A.G. Parents and Friends of Lesbians and Gays. I know.
I know. I know. Thank you, Shane.
I say, "You shouldn't even be in PFLAG. Your gay son is dead,
so he doesn't count anymore." This sounds pretty hurtful,
but I'm bleeding here. I say, "Sorry."
The bandages are tight and the alcohol stings in the dark,
and my father says, "The Wilsons put a PFLAG sign in their
yard. Two nights later, someone drove right through their
lawn, ruined everything."
My folks don't have any PFLAG signs.
"We took ours down," my father says. "Your mother has a
PFLAG bumper sticker, so we keep her car in the garage. Us
taking pride in your brother has put us right on the front
lines."
Out of the dark, my mother says, "Don't forget the
Bradfords. They got a burning bag of dog feces on their front
porch. It could've burned their whole house down with them
sleeping in bed, all because they hung a rainbow PFLAG wind
sock in their backyard." Mom says, "Not even their front yard,
in their backyard."
"Hate," my father says, "is all around us, Bump. Do you
know that?"
My mom says, "Come on, troops. It's chow time."
Dinner is some casserole from the PFLAG cookbook. It's
good, but God only knows what it looks like. Twice, I knock
over my glass in the dark. I sprinkle salt in my lap. Any time I
say a word, my folks shush me. My mom says, "Did you hear
something? Did that come from outside?”
In a whisper, I ask if they remember what tomorrow is. Just to
see if they remember, what with all the tension. It's not as if I'm
expecting a cake with candles and a present.
"Tomorrow," my dad says. "Of course, we know. That's why we're
nervous as cats."
"We wanted to talk to you about tomorrow," my mom says.
"We know how upset you are about your brother still, and we
think it would be good for you if you'd march with our group in the
parade."
Jump to another weird sick disappointment just coming over
the horizon.
Jump to me getting swept up in their big compensation, their
big penance for all those years ago, my father yelling, "We don't
know what kind of filthy diseases you're bringing into this house,
mister, but you can just find another place to sleep, tonight."
They called this tough love.
This is the same dinner table where Mom told Shane, "Doctor
Peterson's office called today." To me she said, "You can go to your
room and read, young lady."
I could've gone to the moon and still heard all the yelling.
Shane and my folks were in the dining room, me, I was behind

my bedroom door. My clothes, most of my school clothes were
outside on the clothesline. Inside, my father said, "It's not strep
throat you've got, mister, and we'd like to know where you've been
and what you've been up to.”
"Drugs," my mom said, "we could deal with."
Shane never said a word. His face still shiny and creased
with scars.
"Teenage pregnancy," my mom said, "we could deal
with."
Not one word.
"Doctor Peterson," she said. "He said there's just about
only one way you could get the disease the way you have it,
but I told him, no, not our child, not you, Shane."
My father said, "We called Coach Ludlow, and he said you
dropped basketball two months ago."

"You'll need to go down to the county health depart-
ment, tomorrow," my mom said.

"Tonight," my father said. "We want you out of here."
Our father.
These same people being so good and kind and caring and
involved, these same people finding identity and personal
fulfillment in the fight on the front lines for equality and
personal dignity and equal rights for their dead son, these
are the same people I hear yelling through my bedroom door.
"We don't know what kind of filthy diseases you're
bringing into this house, mister, but you can just find another
place to sleep tonight."
I remember I wanted to go out and get my clothes, iron
then, fold them, and put them away.
Give me any sense of control.
Flash.
I remember how the front door just opened and shut, it
didn't slam. With the light on in my room, all I could see was
myself reflected in my bedroom window. When I turned out
the light, there was Shane, standing just outside the window,
looking in at me, his face all monster movie hacked and
distorted, dark and hard from the hair-spray blow-up.
Give rne terror.
Flash.
He didn't ever smoke that I knew about, but he lit a
match and put it to a cigarette in his mouth. He knocked on
the window.
He said, "Hey, let me in."
Give me denial.
He said, "Hey, it's cold."
Give me ignorance.
I turned on the bedroom light so I could only see myself
in the window. Then I shut the curtains. I never saw Shane
again.
Tonight, with the lights off, with the curtains shut and the
front door locked, with Shane gone except for the ghost of
him, I ask, "What parade?"
My mom says, "It's the Gay Pride Parade."
My dad says, "We're marching with PFLAG."
And they'd like me to march with them. They'd like me
to sit here in the dark and pretend it's the outside world
we're hiding from. It's some hateful stranger that's going to

come get us in the night. It's some alien fatal sex
disease. They'd like to think it's some bigoted homophobe
they're terrified of. It's not any of it their fault. They'd like me to
think I have something to make up for.
I did not throw away that can of hairspray. All I did was turn out
the bedroom lights. Then there were the fire engines coming in
the distance. There was orange flashing across the outside of my
curtains, and when I got out of bed to look, there were my school
clothes on fire. Hanging dry on the clothesline and layered with
air. Dresses and jumpers and pants and blouses, all of them blazing
and coming apart in the breeze. In a few seconds, everything I loved,
gone.
Flash.
Jump ahead a few years to me being grown up and moving out.
Give me a new start.
Jump to one night, somebody calling from a pay phone to ask
my folks, were they the parents of Shane McFarland? My
parents saying, maybe. The caller won't say where, but he says Shane
is dead.
A voice behind the caller saying, tell them the rest.
Another voice behind the caller saying, tell them Miss Shane
hated their hateful guts and her last words -were: this isn't over yet,
not by a long shot. Then somebody laughing.
Jump to us alone here in the dark with a casserole.
My father says, "So, honey, will you march with your mother and
me?"
My mom says, "It would mean so much for gay rights.”
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Jump to the moment around one o'clock in the morning in
Evie's big silent house when Manus stops screaming and I can
finally think.
Evie is in Cancun, probably waiting for the police to call her and
say: Your house-sitter, the monster without a jaw, well, she's shot
your secret boyfriend to death when he broke in with a butcher
knife is our best guess.
You know that Evie's wide awake right now. In some Mexican
hotel room, Evie's trying to figure out if there's a three-hour or a
four-hour time difference between her big house where I'm
stabbed to death, dead, and Cancun, where Evie's supposed to be
on a catalogue shoot. It's not like Evie is entered in the biggest brain
category. Nobody shoots a catalogue in Cancun in the peak season,
especially not with big-boned cowgirls like Evie Cottrell.
But me being dead, that opens up a whole world of possibility.
I'm an invisible nobody sitting on a white damask sofa facing
another white sofa across a coffee table that looks like a big block
of malachite from Geology 101.
Evie slept with my fiance, so now I can do anything to her.
In the movie, where somebody is invisible all the sudden—you
know, a nuclear radiation fluke or a mad scientist recipe—and you
think, what would I do if I was invisible . . . ? Like go into the guy's
locker room at Gold's gym or, better yet, the Oakland Raiders'
locker room. Stuff like that. Scope things out. Go to Tiffany's and
shoplift diamond tiaras and stuff.
Just by his being so dumb, Manus could've stabbed me, tonight,
thinking I was Evie, thinking Evie shot me, while I was asleep in

the dark in her bed.
My dad, he'd go to my funeral and talk to everybody about how
I was always about to go back to college and finish my personal
fitness training degree and then no doubt go on to medical
school. Dad, Dad, Dad, Dad, Daddy, I couldn't get past the fetal
pig in Biology 101. Now I'm the cadaver.
Sorry, Mom. Sorry, God.
Evie would be right next to my Mom, next to the open casket.
Evie would stagger up leaning on Manus. You know, Evie
would've found something totally grotesque for the undertaker to
dress me in. So Evie throws an arm around my mom, and Manus
can't get away from the open casket fast enough, and I'm laying
there in this blue velveteen casket like the interior of a Lincoln Town
Car. Of course, thank you, Evie, I'm wearing this concubine evening
wear Chinese yellow silk kimono slit up the side to my waist with
black fishnet stockings and red Chinese dragons embroidered across
the pelvic region and my breasts.
And red high heels. And no jawbone.
Of course, Evie says to my mom: "She always loved this dress. This
kimono was her favorite." Sensitive Evie would say, "Guess this
makes you oh for two."
I could kill Evie.
I would pay snakes to bite her.
Evie would be wearing this little black cocktail number with an
asymmetrical hemline satin skirt and a strapless bodice by Rei
Kawakubo. The shoulders and sleeves would be sheer black chiffon.
Evie, you know she has jewelry, big emeralds for her too green eyes
and a change of accessories in her black clutch bag so she can wear
this dress later, dancing.
I hate Evie.
Me, I'm rotting with my blood pumped out in this slut-ty Suzie
Wong Tokyo Rose concubine drag dress where it didn't fit so they
had to pin all the extra together behind my back.
I look like shit, dead.
I look like dead shit.
I would stab Evie right now over the telephone.
No, really, I'd tell Mrs. Cottrell as we placed Evie's urn in a family
vault somewhere in Godawful, Texas. Really, Evie wanted to be
cremated.
Me, at Evie's funeral, I'd be wearing this tourniquet-tight black
leather mini dress by Gianni Versace with yards and yards of black
silk gloves bunched up on my arms. I'd sit next to Manus in the back
of the mortuary's big black Caddy, and I'd have on this wagon
wheel of a black Christian Lacroix hat with a black veil you could
take off later and go to a swell auction preview or estate sale or
something and then, lunch.
Evie, Evie would be dirt. Okay, ashes.
Alone in her living room, I pick up a crystal cigarette box off the
table that looks like a block of malachite, and I overhand fast-pitch
this little treasure against the fireplace bricks. There's a smash with
cigarettes and matches everywhere.
Bourgeoise dead girl that I am, I wish all of the sudden I hadn't
done this, and I kneel down and start to pick up the mess. The glass

and cigarettes. Only Evie . . . a cigarette box. It's just so last-
generational.

And matches.
A little tug hits my finger, and I'm cut on a shard so thin and

clear it's invisible.
Oh, this is dazzling.
Only when the blood comes out to outline the shard in red,
only then can I see what cut me. It's my blood on the broken
glass I pull out. My blood on a book of matches.
No, Mrs. Cottrell. No, really, Evie wanted to be cremated.
I get up out of my mess, and run around leaving blood on
every light switch and lamp, turning them all off. I run past
the coat closet, and Manus calls, "Please," but what I have in
mind is too exciting.
I turn out all the first-floor lights, and Manus calls. He has
to go to the bathroom, he calls. "Please."
Evie's big plantation house with its big pillars in front is all
the way dark as I feel my way back to the dining room. I can
feel the door frame and count ten slow, blind footsteps across
the Oriental carpet to the dining room table with its lace
tablecloth.
I light a match. I light one of the candles in the big silver
candelabra.
Okay, it's so Gothic Novel, but I light all five candles in the
silver candelabra so heavy it takes both hands for me to lift.
Still wearing my satin peignoir set and ostrich feather
bathrobe, what I am is the ghost of a beautiful dead girl
carrying this candle thing up Evie's long circular staircase. Up
past all the oil paintings, then down the second floor hallway.
In the master bedroom, the beautiful ghost girl in her
candlelit satin opens the armoires and the closets full of her
own clothes, stretched to death by the giant evil Evie Cottrell.
The tortured bodies of dresses and sweaters and dresses and
slacks and dresses and jeans and
gowns and shoes and dresses, almost everything mutilated
and misshapen and begging to be put out of its misery.
The photographer in my head says: Give me anger.
Flash.
Give me vengeance.
Flash.
Give me total and complete justified retribution.
Flash.
The already dead ghost I am, the not-occurring, the
completely empowered invisible nothing I've become, I wave
the candelabra past all that fabric and:
Flash.
What we have is Evie's enormous fashion inferno.
Which is dazzling.
Which is just too much fun! I try the bedspread, it's this
antique Belgian lace duvet, and it burns.
The drapes, Miss Evie's green velvet portieres, they burn.
Lampshades burn.
Big shit. The chiffon I'm wearing, it's burning, too. I slap
out my smoldering feathers and step backwards from Evie's
master bedroom fashion furnace and into the second-floor
hallway.
There are ten other bedrooms and some bathrooms, and
I go room to room. Towels burn. Bathroom inferno! Chanel
Number Five, it burns. Oil paintings of race horses and dead
pheasants burn. The reproduction Oriental carpets burn.
Evie's bad dried flower arrangements, they're these little

tabletop infernos. Too cute! Evie's Katty Kathy doll, it melts,
then it burns. Evie's collection of big carnival stuffed
animals—Cootie, Poochie, Pam-Pam, Mr. Bunnits, Choochie,
Poo Poo, and Ringer—it's a fun-fur holocaust. Too sweet. Too
precious.
Back in the bathroom, I snatch one of the few things not
on fire:
A bottle of Valiums.
I start down the big circular staircase. Manus, when he
broke in to kill me, he left the front door open, and the
second-floor inferno sucks a cool breeze of night air up the
stairs around me. Blowing my candles out. Now, the only light
is the inferno, a giant space heater smiling down on me, me
deep fried in my eleven herbs and spices of singed chiffon.
The feeling is that I've just won some major distinguished
award for a major lifetime achievement.
Like, here she is, Miss America.
Come on down.
And this kind of attention, I still love it.
At the closet door, Manus is whining about how he can
smell smoke, and please, please, please don't let him die. As if I
could even care right now.
No, really, Manus wanted to be cremated.
On the telephone message pad, I write
in a minute ill open the door, but i still have the gun.
before that, i'm shoving valiums under the door, eat them,
do this or I'll kill you.
And I put the note under the door.
We're going out to his car in the driveway. I'm taking him
away. He'll do everything I want, or wherever we end up, I'll
tell the police that he broke into the house. He set the fire
and used the rifle to kidnap me. I'll blab everything about
Manus and Evie and their sick love affair.
The word love tastes like earwax when I think it about
Manus and Evie.
I slam the butt of the rifle against the closet door, and the
rifle goes off. Another inch, and I'd be dead. With me dead
outside the locked door, Manus would burn.
"Yes," Manus screams. "I'll do anything. Just, please, don't
let me burn to death or shoot me. Anything, just open the
door!"
With my shoe, I shove the poured-out Valiums through the
crack under the closet door. With the rifle out in front of me, I
unlock the door and stand back. In the light from the upstairs
fire, you can see how the house is filling up with smoke.
Manus stumbles out, power blue bug-eyed with his hands in
the air, and I march him out to his car with the rifle pressed
against his back. Even at the end of a rifle, Manus's skin feels
tight and sexy. Beyond this, I have no plan. All I know is I don't
want anything resolved for a while. Wherever we end up, I
just won't go back to normal.
I lock Manus in the trunk of his Fiat Spider. A nice car, it's a
nice car, red, with the convertible top down. I slam the butt
of the rifle against the trunk lid.
Nothing comes back from my love cargo. Then I wonder if
he still has to pee.
I toss the rifle into the passenger seat and I go back into

Evie's plantation inferno. In the foyer, only now it's a
chimney, it's a wind tunnel with the cold air rushing in the
front door and up into the heat and light above me. The
foyer still has that desk with the gold saxophone telephone.
Smoke is everywhere, and a chorus of every smoke detector
siren sirening is so loud it hurts.
It's just plain mean, making Evie in Cancun lay awake so
long for her good news.
So I call the number she left. You know Evie picks up on
the first ring.
And Evie says, "Hello?"
There's nothing but the sound of everything I've done, the
smoke detectors and the flames, the tinkle of the chandelier
as the breeze chimes through it, that's all there is to hear from
her end of the conversation.
Evie says, "Manus?"
Somewhere, the dining room maybe, the ceiling crashes
down and sparks and embers rush out the dining room
doorway and over the foyer floor.
Evie says, "Manus, don't play games. If this is you, I said I
didn't want to see you anymore."
And right then:
Crash.
A half ton of sparkling, flashing, white-light, hand-cut
Austrian crystal, the big chandelier drops from the center of
the foyer ceiling and explodes too close.
Another inch, and I'd be dead.
How can I not laugh. I'm already dead.
"Listen, Manus," Evie says. "I told you not to call me or I'll
tell the police about how you put my best friend in the
hospital without a face. You got that?"
Evie says, "You just went too far. I'll get a restraining
order if I have too."
Manus or Evie, I don't know who to believe, all I know is
my feathers are on fire.
CHAPTER S I X T E E N
Jump way back to a fashion shoot at this junkyard full of dirty
wrecked cars where Evie and me have to climb around on the
wrecks wearing Hermaun Mancing thong swimwear so narrow you
have to wear a "pussy strip" of surgical tape underneath, and Evie
starts in with, "About your mutilated brother . . . ?"
It's not my favorite photographer or art director, either.
And I'm going back to Evie, "Yeah?" Busy sticking out my butt.
And the photographer goes, "Evie? That's not pouting!
The uglier the fashions, the worse places we'd have to pose to
make them look good. Junkyards. Slaughterhouses.
Sewage treatment plants. It's the ugly bridesmaid tactic
where you only look good by comparison. One shoot for
Industry Jeans Wear, I was sure we'd have to pose kissing dead
bodies.
These junked cars all have rusted holes through them,
serrated edges, and I'm this close to naked and trying to
remember when was my last tetanus shot. The photographer
lowers his camera and says, "I'm only wasting film until you
girls decide to pull in your stomachs."
More and more, being beautiful took so much effort. Just

the razor bumps would make you want to cry. The bikini
waxes. Evie came out of her collagen lip injection saying she
no longer had any fear of hell. The next worse thing is Manus
yanking off your pussy strip if you're not close-shaved.
About hell, I told Evie, "We're shooting there tomorrow."
So, now the art director says, "Evie, could you climb up a
couple cars higher on the pile?" And this is wearing high
heels, but Evie goes up. Little diamonds of safety glass are
scattered on everywhere you might fall.
Through her big cheesy smile, Evie says, "How exactly did
your brother get mutilated?" You can only hold a real smile
for so long, after that it's just teeth.
The art director steps up with his little foam applicator and
retouches where the bronzer is streaked on my butt cheeks.
"It was a hairspray can somebody threw away in our
family's burning barrel," I say. "He was burning the trash and
it exploded."
And Evie says, "Somebody?"
And I say, "You'd think it was my mom, the way she
screamed and tried to stop him bleeding."
And the photographer says, "Girls, can you go up on your
toes just a little?"
Evie goes, "A big thirty-two-ounce can of HairShell
hairspray? I bet it peeled half his face off."
We both go up on our toes.
I go, "It wasn't so bad."
"Wait a sec," the art director says, "I need your feet to be
not so close together." Then he says, "Wider." Then, "A little
wider, please." Then he hands up big chrome tools for us to
hold.
Mine must weigh fifteen pounds.
"It's a ball-peen hammer," Evie says, "and you're holding it
wrong."
"Honey," the photographer says to Evie, "could you hold
the chainsaw a bit closer to your mouth, please?"
The sun is warm on the metal of the cars, their tops
crushed under the weight of being piled on top each
other. These are cars with buckled front ends you know
nobody walked away from. Cars with T-boned sides where
whole familes died together. Rear-ended cars with the back
seats pushed up tight against the dashboard. Cars from
before seatbelts. Cars from before air bags. Before the Jaws of Life.
Before paramedics. These are cars peeled open around their
exploded gas tanks.
"This is so rich," Evie says, "how this is the place I've worked my
whole life to get."
The art director says to go ahead and push our breasts against
the cars.
"The whole time, growing up," Evie says, "I just thought
being a woman would be . . . not such a disappointment."
All I ever wanted was to be an only child.
The photographer says, "Perfecto.”
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

What you get with the Rhea sisters is three skin-and-
bone white men who sit around a suite at the Congress Hotel

all day in nylon slips with the shoulder straps fallen off one

shoulder or the other, wearing high heels and smoking
cigarettes. Kitty Litter, Sofonda Peters, and the Vivacious

Vivienne VaVane, their faces shining with moisturizer and egg-
white facials, they listen to that step-to-three cha-cha music

you only hear on elevators anymore. The Rhea sister hair,
their hair is short and flat with grease and matted down
bristling with bobby pins, flat on their heads. Maybe they have
a wig cap stretched on over the pins if it's not summer outside.
Most of the time, they don't know what season it is. The blinds

aren't ever open, and there are maybe a dozen of those cha-
cha records stacked on the automatic record changer.

All the furniture is blonde and the big four-legged RCA
Philco console stereo. The stereo, you could plow a field with
that old needle, and the metal tone arm weighs about two
pounds.
May I present them:
Kitty Litter.
Sofonda Peters.
The Vivacious Vivienne VaVane.
AKA the Rhea sisters when they're onstage, these are her
family, Brandy Alexander told me in the speech therapist
office. Not the first time we met, this wasn't the time I cried
and told Brandy how I lost my face. This wasn't the second
time, either, the time Brandy brought her sewing basket full
of ways to hide my being a monster. This was one of the other
tons of times we snuck off while I was still in the hospital. The
speech therapist office was just where we'd meet.
"Usually," Brandy tells me, "Kitty Litter is bleaching and
tweezing away unwanted facial hair. This unsightly hair
thing can tie up a bathroom for hours, but Kitty would
wear her Ray-Bans inside out, she loves looking at her
reflection so much."
The Rheas, they made Brandy what she is. Brandy, she owes
them everything.
Brandy would lock the speech therapist door, and if
somebody would knock, Brandy and me, we'd fake loud
orgasm noises. We'd scream and yip and slap the floor. I'd clap my
hands to make that special spanking sound that everybody knows.
Whoever knocks, they'd go away fast.
Then we'd go back to just us using up make-up and talking.
"Sofonda," Brandy would tell me, "Sofonda Peters, she's the
brains, Sofonda is. Miss Peters is all day with her porcelain nails stuck
in the rotary-dial princess phone to an agent or a merchandiser,
selling, selling, selling."
Somebody would knock on the speech therapist door, so I'd give
out with a cat scream and slap my thigh.
The Rhea sisters, Brandy would tell me, she'd be dead without
them. When they'd found her, the princess queen supreme, she'd
been a size twenty-six, lip-synching at amateur-night, open-mike
shows. Lip-synching "Thumbelina."
Her hair, her figure, her hippy, hippy forward Brandy Alexander
walk, the Rhea sisters invented all that.
Jump to two fire engines passing me in the opposite direction as I
drive the freeway toward downtown, away from Evie's house on
fire. In the rearview mirror of Manus's Fiat Spider, Evie's house is a
smaller and smaller bonfire. The peachy-pink hem of Evie's bathrobe
is shut in the car door, and the ostrich feathers whip me in the cool

night air pouring around the convertible's windshield.
Smoke is all I smell like. The rifle on the passenger seat is pointing
at the floor.
There's not one word from my love cargo in the trunk.
And there's only one place left to go.
No way could I call and just ask the operator to ring Brandy. No
way would the operator understand me, so we're on our way
downtown to the Congress Hotel.
Jump to how all the Rhea sister money comes from a doll named
Katty Kathy. This is what else Brandy told me between faking
orgasms in the speech therapist office. She's a doll, Katty Kathy is one of
those foot-high flesh-tone dolls with the impossible measurements.
What she would be as a real woman is 46-16-26. As a real woman,
Katty Kathy could buy a total of nothing off the rack. You know
you've seen this doll. Comes naked in a plastic bubble pack for a
dollar, but her clothes cost a fortune, that's how realistic she is. You can
buy about four hundred tiny fashion separates that mix and match to
create three tasteful outfits. In that way, the doll is incredibly lifelike.
Chilling, even.
Sofonda Peters came up with the idea. Invented Katty Kathy,
made the prototype, sold the doll, and cut all the deals. Still,
Sofonda is about married to Kitty and Vivian and there's enough
money to support them all.
What sold Katty Kathy is that she's a talking doll, but instead of
a string, she's got this little gold chain coming out of her back. You
pull her chain, and she says:
"That dress is fine, I mean, if that's really how you want to
look.”
"Your heart is my pinata."
"Is that what you're going to wear?"
"I think it would be good for our relationship if we dated
other people."
"Kiss kiss."
And, "Don't touch my hair!"
The Rhea sisters, they made a bundle. Katty Kathy's little
bolero jacket alone, they have that jacket sewn in Cambodia
for a dime and sell it here in America for sixteen dollars.
People pay that.
Jump to me parking the Fiat with its trunk full of my love
cargo on a side street, and me walking up Broadway toward
the doorman at the Congress Hotel. I'm a woman with half a
face arriving at a luxury hotel, one of those big glazed terra
cotta palace hotels built a hundred years ago, where the
doormen wear tailcoats with gold braid on the shoulders. I'm
wearing a peignoir set and a bathrobe. No veils. Half the
bathrobe has been shut in a car door, dragging on the
freeway for the past twenty miles. My ostrich feathers smell
like smoke, and I'm trying to keep it a big secret that I have a
rifle tucked up crutch-like under my arm.
Yeah, and I lost a shoe, one of those high-heeled mules, too.
The doorman in his tailcoat doesn't even look at me.
Yeah, and my hair, I see it reflected in the big brass plaque that
says The Congress Hotel. The cool night air has pulled my
butter creme frosting hairdo out into a ratted stringy mess.
Jump to me at the front desk of the Congress Hotel
where I try and make my eyes alluring. They say what people
notice first about you is your eyes. I have the attention of what

must be the night auditor, the bellman, the manager, and a
clerk. First impressions are so important. It must be the way
I'm dressed or the rifle. Using the hole that's the top of my
throat, my tongue sticking out of it and all the scar tissue
around it, I say, "Gerl terk nahdz gah sssid."
Everybody is just flash frozen by my alluring eyes.
I don't know how, but then the rifle's up on the desk,
pointing at nobody in particular.
The manager steps up in his navy blue blazer with its little
brass Mr. Baxter name tag, and he says, "We can give you all
the money in the drawer, but no one here can open the safe
in the office."
The gun on the desk points right at the brass Mr. Baxter
nametag, a fact that hasn't gone unnoticed. I snap my fingers
and point at a piece of paper for him to give me. With the
guest pen on a chain, I write:
which suite are the rhea sisters in? don't make me knock
on every door on the fifteenth floor, it's the middle of the
night.
"That would be Suite 15-G," says Mr. Baxter, both his hands
full of cash I don't want and reached out across the desk
toward me. "The elevators," he says, "are to your right."
Jump to me being Daisy St. Patience the first day Brandy and I
sat together. The day of the frozen turkey after the whole summer
I waited for somebody to ask me what happened to my face, and I
told Brandy everything.
Brandy, when she sat me in the chair still hot from her ass and
she locked the speech therapist door that first time, she named
me out of my future. She named me Daisy St. Patience and never
wanted to know what name I walked in the door with. I was the
rightful heir to the international fashion house, the House of St.
Patience.
Brandy she just talked and talked. We were running out of air,
she talked so much, and I don't mean just we, Brandy and me. I
mean the world. The world was running out of air, Brandy talked
that much. The Amazon Basin just could not keep up.
"Who you are moment to moment," Brandy said, "is just a
story."
What I needed was a new story.
"Let me do for you," Brandy said, "what the Rhea sisters did for
me."
Give me courage.
Flash.
Give me heart.
Flash.
So jump to me being Daisy St. Patience going up in that
elevator, and Daisy St. Patience walking down that wide
carpeted hallway to Suite 15-G. Daisy knocks and nobody
answers. Through the door, you can hear that cha-cha music.
The door opens six inches, but the chain is on so it stops.
Three white faces appear in the six-inch gap, one on top
of the other, Kitty Litter, Sofonda Peters, and the vivacious
Vivienne VaVane, their faces shining with moisturizer. Their
short dark hair is matted down flat with bobby pins and wig
caps.
The Rhea sisters.
Who's who, I don't know. The drag queen totem pole in the

door crack says:
"Don't take the queen supreme from us."
"She's all we have to do with our lives."
"She isn't finished yet. We're not half done, and there's just
so much more we have to do on her."
I give them a peekaboo pink chiffon flash of the rifle, and
the door slams.
Through the door, you can hear the chain come off. Then
the door opens all the way.
Jump to one time, late one night, driving between
Nowhere, Wyoming, and WhoKnowsWhere, Montana, when
Seth says how your being born makes your parents God. You
owe them your life, and they can control you.
"Then puberty makes you Satan," he says, "just
because you want something better."
Jump to inside suite 15-G with its blonde furniture and
the bossa-nova cha-cha music and cigarette smoke, and the
Rhea sisters are flying around the room in their nylon slips
with the shoulder straps off one shoulder or the other. I
don't have to do anything but point the rifle.
"We know who you are, Daisy St. Patience," one of them
says, lighting a cigarette, "With a face like that, you're all
Brandy talks about anymore."
All over the room are these big, big 1959 spatter glaze
ashtrays so big you only have to empty them every couple years.
The one with the cigarette gives me her long hand with
its porcelain nails and says, "I'm Pie Rhea."
"I'm Die Rhea," says another one, near the stereo.
The one with the cigarette, Pie Rhea, says, "Those are our
stagenames." She points at the third Rhea, over on the sofa,
eating Chinese out of a takeaway carton. "That," she says and
points, "This Miss Eating Herself To Fat, you can call her Gon
Rhea."
With her mouth full of nothing you'd want to see, Gon
Rhea says, "Charmed, I'm sure."
Putting her cigarette everywhere but in her mouth, Pie Rhea says,
"The queen just does not need your problems, not tonight." She
says, "We're all the family the top girl needs."
On the stereo is a picture in a silver frame of a girl,
beautiful in front of seamless paper, smiling into an unseen
camera, an invisible photographer telling her:
Give me passion.
Flash.
Give me joy.
Flash.
Give me youth and energy and innocence and beauty.
Flash.
"Brandy's first family, her birth family, didn't want her, so
we adopted her," says Die Rhea. Pointing her long finger at
the picture smiling on the blonde stereo, Die Rhea says, "Her
birth family thinks she's dead."
Jump to one time back when I had a face and I did this
magazine cover shoot for BabeWear magazine.
Jump back to Suite 15-G and the picture on the blonde
stereo is me, my cover, the BabeWear magazine cover, framed
with Die Rhea pointing her finger at me.
Jump back to us in the speech therapist office with the

door locked and Brandy saying how lucky she was the Rhea
sisters found her. It's not everybody who gets a second chance
to be born again and raised a second time, but this time by a
family that loves her.
"Kitty Litter, Sofonda, and Vivienne," Brandy says, "I owe
them everything."
Jump to Suite 15-G and Gon Rhea waving her chopsticks at
me and saying, "Don't you try and take her from us. We're
not finished with her yet."
"If Brandy goes with you," says Pie Rhea, "she can pay for
her own conjugated estrogens. And her vaginoplasty. And her
labiaplasty. Not to mention her scrotal electrolysis."
To the picture on the stereo, to the smiling stupid face in
the silver frame, Die Rhea says, "None of that is cheap."
Die Rhea lifts the picture and holds it up to me, my past
looking me eye to eye, and Die Rhea says, "This, this is how
Brandy wanted to look, like her bitch sister. That was two
years ago, before she had laser surgery to thin her vocal cords
and then her trachea shave. She had her scalp advanced three
centimeters to give her the right hairline. We paid for her
brow shave to get rid of the bone ridge above her eyes that
the Miss Male used to have. We paid for her jaw contouring
and her forehead feminiza-tion."
"And," Gon Rhea says with her mouth full of chewed-up
Chinese, "and every time she came home from the hospital
with her forehead broken and realigned or her Adam's apple
shaved down to a ladylike nothing, who do you think took care of
her for those two years?"
Jump to nay folks asleep in their bed across mountains and
deserts away from here. Jump to them and their telephone and
years ago some crazy man, some screeching awful pervert, calling
them and screaming that their son was dead. Their son they didn't
want, Shane, he was dead of AIDS and this man wouldn't say where
or when and then he laughed and hung up.
Jump back to inside Suite 15-G and Die Rhea waving an old
picture of me in my face and saying, "This is how she wanted to
look, and tens of thousands of Katty Kathy dollars later, this is how
she looks."
Gon Rhea says, "Hell. Brandy looks better than that."
"We're the ones who love Brandy Alexander," says Pie Rhea.
"But you're the one Brandy loves because you need her," says
Die Rhea.
Gon Rhea says, "The one you love and the one who loves you
are never, ever the same person." She says, "Brandy will leave us if
she thinks you need her, but we need her, too.”
The one I love is locked in the trunk of a car outside with
a stomach full of Valiums, and I wonder if he still has to pee.
My brother I hate is come back from the dead. Shane's being
dead was just too good to be true.
First the exploding hairspray can didn't kill him.
Then our family couldn't just forget him.
Now even the deadly AIDS virus has failed me.

My brother is nothing but one bitter fucking disap-
pointment after another.

You can hear a door opening and shutting somewheres,
then another door, then another door opens and Brandy's
there saying, "Daisy, honey," and steps into the smoke and cha-

cha music wearing this amazing sort of Bill Blass First Lady
type of traveling suit made out of solid kelly green trimmed
with white piping and green high heels and a really smart
green purse. On her head is an eco-incorrect tasty sort of
spray of rainforest green parrot feathers made into a hat, and
Brandy says, "Daisy, honey, don't point a gun at the people
who I love."

In each of Brandy's big ring-beaded hands is a sassy off-
white American Tourister luggage. "Give us a hand,

somebody. These are just the royal hormones." She says, "My
clothes I need are in the other room."
To Sofonda, Brandy says, "Miss Pie Rhea, I have just got to
get."
To Kitty, Brandy says, "Miss Die Rhea, I've done everything
we can do for now. We've done the scalp advance-merit, the
brow lift, the brow bone shave. We've done the trachea shave,
the nose contouring, the jawline contouring, the forehead
realignment . . . "
Like it's any wonder I didn't recognize my old mutilated
brother.
To Vivienne, Brandy says, "Miss Gon Rhea, I've got months
left on my Real Life Training and I'm not spending them holed
up here in this hotel."
Jump to us driving away with the Fiat Spider just piled
with luggage. Imagine desperate refugees from Beverly Hills

with seventeen pieces of matched luggage migrating cross-
country to start a new life in the Okie Midwest. Everything

very elegant and tasteful, one of those epic Joad family
vacations, only backwards. Leaving a trail of cast-off accessories,
shoes and gloves and chokers and hats to lighten their load
so's they can cross the Rocky Mountains, that would be us.
This is after the police showed up, no doubt after the
hotel manager called and said a mutilated psycho with a gun
was menacing everybody up on the fifteenth floor. This is
after the Rhea sisters ran all Brandy's luggage down the fire
stairs. This is after Brandy says she has to go, she needs to
think about things, you know, before her big surgery. You
know. The transformation.
This is after I keep looking at Brandy and wondering,
Shane?
"It's just such a big commitment," Brandy says, "being a
girl, you know. Forever."
Taking the hormones. For the rest of her life. The pills, the
patches, the injections, for the rest of her life. And what if
there was someone, just one person who would love her, who
could make her life happy, just the way she was, without the
hormones and make-up and the clothes and shoes and
surgery? She has to at least look around the world a little.
Brandy explains all this, and the Rhea sisters start to cry and
wave and pile the American Touristers into the car.
And the whole scene would be just heartbreaking, and I
would be boo-hooing too, if I didn't know Brandy was my
dead brother and the person he wants to love him is me, his
hateful sister, already plotting to kill him. Yes. Plotting me,
plotting to kill Brandy Alexander. Me with nothing left to
lose, plotting my big revenge in the spotlight.
Give me violent revenge fantasies as a coping mechanism.

Flash.
Just give me my first opportunity.
Flash.
Brandy behind the wheel, she turns to me, her eyes all
spidery with tears and mascara, and says, "Do you know what
the Benjamin Standard Guidelines are?"
Brandy starts the car and puts it in gear. She drops the
parking brake and cranes her neck to see for traffic. She says,
"I have to live one whole year on hormones in my new gender
role before my vaginoplasty. They call it Real Life Training."
Brandy pulls out into the street and we're almost
escaped. Police SWAT teams in chic basic black accessorized
with tear gas and semiautomatic weapons are charging in past
the doorman holding the door in his gold braid. The Rheas run
after us, waving and throwing kisses and doing pretty much
ugly bridesmaid behavior until they stumble, panting, in the
street, their high heels shot to hell.
There's a moon in the sky. Office buildings are
canyoned along either side of the street. There's still Manus
in the trunk, and we're already putting gross distance
between me and my getting caught.
Brandy puts her big hand open on my leg and squeezes.
Arson, kidnapping, I think I'm up to murder. Maybe all this
will get me just a glimmer of attention, not the good, glorious
kind, but still the national media kind.
Monster Girl Slays Secret Brother Gal Pal
"I've got eight months left to my R.L.T. year," Brandy says.
"Think you can keep me busy for the next eight months?”
CHAPTER E I G H TEEN
Half my life I spend hiding in the bathrooms of the rich.
Jump back to Seattle, to the time Brandy and Seth and I
are on the road hunting drugs. Jump to the day after the
night we went to the Space Needle, where right now Brandy
is laid out flat on a master bathroom floor. First I helped her
off with her suit jacket and unbuttoned the back of her
blouse, and now I'm sitting on a toilet overdosing Valiums as
steady as Chinese water torture into her Plumbago mouth. The
thing about Valiums, the Brandy girl says, is they don't kill the
pain but at least you're not pissed off about being hurt.
"Hit me," Brandy says and makes a fish lips.
The thing about Brandy is she's got such a tolerance for drugs it
takes forever to kill her. That, and she's so big, most of her being
muscle, it would take bottles and bottles of anything.
I drop a Valium. A little baby-blue Valium, another powder blue
Valium, Tiffany's light blue, like a gift from Tiffany's, the Valium
falls end over end into Brandy's interior.
This suit I help Brandy out of, it's a Pierre Cardin Space Age
style of just bold white, the straight tube skirt being fresh and sterile
to just above her knees, the jacket being timeless and clinical in its
simple cut and three-quarter sleeves. Her blouse underneath is
sleeveless. Her shoes are box-toe white vinyl boots. It's an outfit
you'd accessorize with a Geiger counter instead of a purse.
At the Bon Marche, when she catwalks out of the fitting room,
all I can do is applaud. There's going to be postpartum depression
next week when she goes to take this one back.
Jump to breakfast, this morning when Brandy and Seth were

flush with drug money, we were eating room service and Seth says
Brandy could time travel to Las Vegas on another planet in the
1950s and fit right in. The planet Krylon, he says, where synthetic
bendable glam-bots would lipo-suck your fat and makeover you.
And Brandy says, "What fat?”
And Seth says, "I love how you could just be visiting from
the distant future via the 1960s."
And I put more Premarin in Seth's next coffee refill. More
Darvon in Brandy's Champagne.
Jump back to us in the bathroom, Brandy and me.
"Hit me," Brandy says.
Her lips look all loose and stretched-out, and I drop
another gift from Tiffany's.
This bathroom we're hiding in, it goes way the other side
of decorative touches. The whole deal is an undersea grotto.
Even the princess phone is aqua, but when you look out the
big brass porthole windows, you see Seattle from the top of
Capitol Hill.
The toilet I'm sitting on, just sitting, the lid's closed under
my ass thank you, but the toilet's a big ceramic snail shell
bolted to the wall. The sink is a big ceramic half a clam bolted
to the wall.
Brandy-land, sexual playground to the stars, she says, "Hit
me."
Jump to when we got here and the realtor was just a big
tooth. One of those football scholarships where the eyebrows
grow together in the middle and they forget to get a degree
in anything.
As if I can talk, me with sixteen hundred credits.
Here's this million-dollar-club realtor who got thrown his job by
a grateful alumnus who just wanted a son-in-law who could stay
awake through six or seven holiday bowl games. But maybe I'm
being a touch judgmental.

Brandy was beside herself for feminine wetness. Here's this extra-
Y chromosome guy in a double-breasted blue serge suit, a guy

whose paws make even Brandy's big hands look little.
"Mr. Parker," Brandy says, her hand hidden inside his big paw.
You can see the Hank Mancini soundtrack of love in her eyes. "We
spoke this morning."
We're in the drawing room of a house on Capitol Hill. This is
another rich house where everything is exactly what it looks like.
The elaborate Tudor roses carved in the ceilings are plaster, not
pressed tin, not fiberglass. The torsos of battered Greek nudes are
marble, not marbleized plaster. The boxes in the breakfront are not
enameled in the manner of Faberge. The boxes are Faberge
pillboxes, and there are eleven of them. The lace under the boxes
was not tatted by a machine.
Not just the spines, but the entire front and back covers of all the
books on all the shelves in the library are bound in leather, and the
pages are cut. You don't have to pull a single book to know this.
The realtor, Mr. Parker, his legs are still flat on the sides of his ass.
In the front, there's just enough more in one pant leg to spell
boxers instead of briefs.
Brandy nods my way. "This is Miss Arden Scotia, of the Denver
River Logging and Paper Scotias." Another victim of the
Brandy Alexander Witness Reincarnation Project.
Parker's big hand swallows my little hand, big fish and

little fish, whole.
Parker's starched white shirt makes you think of eating off
a clean tablecloth, so flat and stuck out you could serve drinks
off the shelf of his barrel chest.

"This," Brandy nods toward Seth, "is Miss Scotia's half-
brother, Ellis Island."

Parker's big fish eats Ellis's little fish.
Brandy says, "Miss Scotia and I would like to tour the
house ourselves. Ellis is mentally and emotionally disturbed."
Ellis smiles.
"We had hoped you would watch him," Brandy says.
"It's a go," Parker says. He says, "Sure thing."
Ellis smiles and tugs with two fingers at the sleeve of
Brandy's suit jacket. Ellis says, "Don't leave me too long, miss.
If I don't get enough of my pills, I'll have one of my fits."
"Fits?" says Parker.
Ellis says, "Sometimes, Miss Alexander, she forgets I'm
waiting, and she doesn't get me any medication."
"You have fits?" Parker says.
"This is news to me," Brandy says and smiles. "You will not
have a fit," Brandy tell my new half-brother. "Ellis, I forbid
you to have a fit.”
Jump to us camped out in the undersea grotto.
"Hit me."
The floor under Brandy's back, it's cold tile shaped like fish and
laid out so they fit together, one fish tail between the heads of two
fish, the way some sardines are canned, all the way across the
bathroom floor.
I drop a Valium between Plumbago lips.
"Did I ever tell you how my family threw me out?" says Brandy
after her little blue swallow. "My original family, I mean. My birth
family. Did I ever tell you that messy little story?"
I put my head between my knees and look straight down at
the queen supreme with her head between my feet.
"My throat was hurting for a couple of days, so I got out of
school and everything," Brandy says. She says, "Miss Arden? Hello?"
I look down at her. It's so easy to imagine her dead.
"Miss Arden, please," she says. "Hit me?"
I drop another Valium.
Brandy swallows. "It was like I couldn't swallow for days," she
says. "My throat 'was that sore. I could barely talk. My folks, they
thought, of course, it was strep throat."
Brandy's head is almost straight under mine as I look down.
Only Brandy's face is upside down. My eyes look right into the
dark interior of her Plumbago mouth, dark wet going inside
to her works and organs and everything behind the scenes.
Brandy Alexander Backstage. Upside down she could be a
complete stranger.
And Ellis was right, you only ask people about themselves
so you can tell them about yourself.
"The culture," Brandy says. "The swab they did for Strep
Throat came back positive for the clap. You know, the third
Rhea sister. Gonorrhea," she says. "That little tiny
gonococcus bug. I was sixteen years old and had the clap. My
folks did not deal with it well."
No. No, they didn't.
"They freaked," Brandy says.

They threw him out of the house.
"They yelled about how diseased I was being," Brandy says.
Then they threw him out.
"By 'diseased' I think they meant 'gay'," she says.
Then they threw him out.
"Miss Scotia?" she says. "Hit me."
So I hit her.
"Then they threw me out of the damn house."
Jump to Mr. Parker outside the bathroom door saying,
"Miss Alexander? It's me, Miss Alexander. Miss Scotia, are you
in there?"
Brandy starts to sit up and props herself on one elbow.
"It's Ellis," Mr. Parker says through the door. "I think you
should come downstairs. Miss Scotia, your brother's having a seizure
or something."
Drugs and cosmetics are spread out all over the aquamarine
countertops, and Brandy's sprawled half-naked on the floor in a
sprinkling of pills and capsules and tablets.
"He's her half-brother," Brandy calls back.
The doorknob rattles. "You have to help me," Parker says.
"Stop right there, Mr. Parker!" Brandy shouts and the
doorknob stops turning. "Calm yourself. Do not come in here,"
Brandy says. "What you need to do," Brandy looks at me while she
says this, "what you need to do is pin Ellis to the floor so he doesn't
hurt himself. I'll be down in a moment."
Brandy looks at me and smiles her Plumbago lips into a big
bow. "Parker?" she says, "Are you listening?"
"Please, hurry," comes through the door.
"After you have Ellis pinned to the floor," Brandy says, "wedge
his mouth open with something. Do you have a wallet?"
There's a moment.
"It's eel skin, Miss Alexander."
"Then you must be very proud of it," says Brandy. "You're
going to have to jam it between his teeth to keep his mouth open.
Sit on him if you have to," Brandy, she's just smiling evil incarnate
at my feet.
The shatter of some real lead crystal comes through the door
from downstairs.
"Hurry!" Parker shouts. "He's breaking things!"
Brandy licks her lips. "After you have his mouth pried
open, Parker, reach in and grab his tongue. If you don't, he'll
choke, and then you'll be sitting on a dead body."
Silence.
"Do you hear me?" Brandy says.
"Grab his tongue?"
Something else real and expensive and far away shatters.
"Mr. Parker, honey, I hope you're bonded," the Princess
Alexander says, her face all bloated red with choking back
laughter. "Yes," she says, "grab Ellis's tongue. Pin him to the
floor, keep his mouth open, and pull his tongue out as far as
you can until I come down to help you."
The doorknob turns.
My veils are all on the vanity counter out of my reach.
The door opens far enough to hit the high-heeled foot of

Brandy, sprawled giggling and half full of Valiums, there half-
naked in drugs on the floor. This is far enough for me to see

Parker's face with its one grown-together eyebrow, and far

enough for the face to see me sitting on the toilet.
Brandy screams, "I am attending to Miss Arden Scotia!"
Given the choice between grabbing a strange tongue and
watching a monster poop into a giant snail shell, the face
retreats and slams the door behind it.
Football scholarship footsteps charge off down the hallway.
Then pound down the stairs.
The big tooth that Parker is, his footsteps pound across the foyer
to the living room.
Ellis's scream, real and sudden and far away, comes through the
floor from downstairs. And, suddenly, stops.
"Now," says Brandy, "where were we?"
She lies back down with her head between my feet.
"Have you thought any more about plastic surgery?" Brandy says.
Then she says, "Hit me.”
CHAPTER NINETEEN
When you go out with a drunk, you'll notice how a
drunk fills your glass so he can empty his own. As long as
you're drinking, drinking is okay. Two's company. Drinking
is fun. If there's a bottle, even if your glass isn't empty, a
drunk, he'll pour a little in your glass before he fills his own.
This only looks like generosity.
That Brandy Alexander, she's always on me about plastic
surgery. Why don't I, you know, just look at what's out there.
With her chest siliconed, her hips lipo-sucked, the 46-16-26
Katty Kathy hourglass thing she is, the fairy godmother
makeover, my fair lady, Pygmalion thing she is, my brother back
from the dead, Brandy Alexander is very invested in plastic surgery.
And visa versa.
Bathroom talk.
Brandy's still laid out on the cold tile floor, high atop Capitol
Hill in Seattle. Mr. Parker has come and gone. Just Brandy and me
all afternoon. I'm still sitting on the open end of a huge ceramic
snail shell bolted to the wall. Trying to kill her in my half-assed way.
Brandy's auburn head of hair is between my feet. Lipsticks and
Demerols, blushes and Percocet-5, Aubergine Dreams and Nembutal
Sodium capsules are spread out all over the aquamarine
countertops around the vanity sink.
My hand, I've been holding a handful of Valiums so long my
palm has gone Tiffany's light blue. Just Brandy and me all
afternoon with the sun coming in at lower and lowers angles
through the big brass porthole windows.
"My waist," Brandy says. The Plumbago mouth looks a little too
blue, Tiffany's light blue if you ask me. Overdose baby blue.
"Sofonda said I had to have a sixteen -inch waist," Brandy says. "I said,
'Miss Sofonda, I am big-boned. I am six feet tall. No way am I
getting down to a sixteen-inch waistline."
Sitting on the snail shell, I'm only half listening.
"Sofonda," Brandy says, "Sofonda says, there's a way, but I have
to trust her. When I wake up in the recovery room, I'll have a
sixteen-inch waist."
It's not like I haven't heard this story in a dozen other
bathrooms. Another bottle off the countertop, Bilax capsules,
I look it up in the Phyicians'Desk Reference book.

Bilax capsules. A bowel evacuant.
Maybe I should drop a few of these into that nonstop
mouth between my feet.
Jump to Manus watching me do that infomercial. We

were so beautiful. Me with a face. Him not so full of con-
jugated estrogens.

I thought we were a real love relationship. I did. I was very
invested in love, but it was just this long, long sex thing that
could end at any moment because, after all, it's just about
getting off. Manus would close his power blue eyes and twist
his head just so, side to side, and swallow.
And, Yes, I'd tell Manus. I came right when he did.
Pillow talk.
Almost all the time, you tell yourself you're loving
somebody when you're just using them.
This only looks like love.
Jump to Brandy on the bathroom floor, saying, "Sofonda
and Vivienne and Kitty were all with me at the hospital." Her
hands curl up off the tile, and she runs them up and down
the sides of her blouse. "All three of them wore those baggy
green scrub suits, wearing hairnets over their wigs and with
those Duchess of Windsor costume jewelry brooches pinned on
their scrub suits," Brandy says. "They were flying around behind
the surgeon and the lights, and Sofonda was telling me to count
backwards from one hundred. You know . . . 99 . . . 98 . . . 97 ..."
The Aubergine Dreams eyes close. Brandy, pulling long, even
breaths, says, "The doctors, they took out the bottom rib on each
side of my chest." Her hands rub where, and she says, "I couldn't
sit up in bed for two months, but I had a sixteen-inch waist. I still
have a six-teen-inch waist."
One of Brandy's hands opens to full flower and slides over the
flat land where her blouse tucks into the belt of her skirt. "They cut
out two of my ribs, and I never saw them again," Brandy says.
"There's something in the Bible about taking out your ribs."
The creation of Eve.
Brandy says, "I don't know why I let them do that to me."
And Brandy, she's asleep.
Jump back to the night Brandy and I started this road trip, the
night we left the Congress Hotel with Brandy driving the way you
can only drive at two-thirty AM in an open sports car with a loaded

rifle and an overdosed hostage. Brandy hides her eyes behind Ray-
Bans so she can drive in a little privacy. Instant glamour from

another planet in the 1950s, Brandy pulls an Hermes scarf over
her auburn hair and ties it under her chin.
All I can see is myself reflected in Brandy's Ray-Bans, tiny
and horrible. Still strung out and pulled apart by the cold
night air around the windshield. Bathrobe still dragging shut
in the car door. My face, you touch my blasted, scar-tissue face
and you'd swear you were touching chunks of orange peel and
leather.
Driving east, I'm not sure what we're running from. Evie
or the police or Mr. Baxter or the Rhea sisters. Or nobody. Or
the future. Fate. Growing up, getting old. Picking up the
pieces. As if by running we won't have to get on with our
lives. I'm with Brandy right now because I can't imagine
getting away with this without Brandy's help. Because, right
now, I need her.

Not that I really love her. Him. Shane.
Already the word love is sounding pretty thin.

Hermes scarf on her head, Ray-Bans on her head, make-
up on her face, I look at the queen supreme in the pulse-
pulse, then pulse-pulse, then pulse-pulse of oncoming

headlights. What I see when I look at Brandy, this is what
Manus saw when he took me sailing.
Right now, looking at flashes of Brandy beside me in
Manus's car, I know what it is I loved about her. What I love
is myself. Brandy Alexander just looks exactly the way I looked
before the accident. Why wouldn't she? She's my brother,
Shane. Shane and I were almost the same height, born one
year apart. The same coloring. The same features. The same
hair, only Brandy's hair is in better shape.
Add to this her lipo, her silicone, her trachea shave, her brow
shave, her scalp advance, her forehead realignment, her rhino
contouring to smooth her nose, her maxomil-liary operations to
shape her jaw. Add to all that years of electrolysis and a handful of
hormones and antiandrogens every day, and it's no wonder I didn't
recognize her.
Plus the idea my brother's been dead for years. You just don't
expect to meet dead people.
What I love is myself. I was so beautiful.
My love cargo, Manus LockedInTheTrunk, Manus
TryingToKillMe, how can I keep thinking I love Manus? Manus is just
the last man who thought I was beautiful. Who kissed me on the
lips. Who touched me. Manus is just the last man who ever told me
he loved me.
You count down the facts and it's so depressing.
I can only eat baby food.
My best friend screwed my fiance.
My fiance almost stabbed me to death.
I've set fire to a house and been pointing a rifle at innocent
people all night.
My brother I hate has come back from the dead to upstage me.
I'm an invisible monster, and I'm incapable of loving anybody.
You don't know which is worse. Jump to me wetting a washcloth
in the vanity sink. In the undersea bathroom grotto even the
towels and washcloths are aqua and blue, with a scalloped
shell motif along the hems. I put the cold, wet washcloth on
Brandy's forehead and wake her up, so's she can take more
pills. Die in the car instead of this bathroom.
I haul Brandy to her feet and stuff the princess back into
her suit jacket.
We have to walk her around before anybody sees her this
way.
I strap her high heels back on her feet. Brandy, she leans
on me. She leans on the edge of the countertop. She picks up
a handful of Bilax capsules and squints down at them.
"My back is killing me," Brandy says. " Why'd I ever let them
give me such big tits?"
The queen supreme looks ready to swallow a handful of
anything.
I shake my head, No.
Brandy squints at me, "But I need these."
In the Physicians' Desk Reference, I show her Bilax, bowel
evacuant.

"Oh," Brandy turns her hand over to spill the Bilax into
her purse, and some capsules fall but some stick to the sweat
on her palm. "After they give you the tits, your nipples are
cockeyed and way too high," she says, "they use a razor to
shave the nipples off, and they relocate them.”
That's her word.
Relocate.
The Brandy Alexander Nipple Relocation Program.
My dead brother, the late Shane, shakes the last bowel evacuant
off her damp palm. Rrandy says, "I have no sensation in my nipples."
Off the counter, I get my veils and put layer after layer over my
head.
Thank you for not sharing.
We walk up and down the second floor hallways until Rrandy
says she's ready for the stairs. Step at a time, quiet, we go down to
the foyer. Across the foyer, through the double doors closed on the
drawing room, you can hear Mr. Parker's deep voice saying
something soft, over and over.
Brandy leaning on me, we tiptoe a slow three-legged race
across the foyer, from the foot of the stairs to the drawing room
doors. We crack the doors open some inches and poke our faces
through the crack.
Ellis is laid out on the drawing room carpet.
Mr. Parker is sitting on Ellis's chest with a size seventeen wingtip
planted on each side of Ellis's head.
Ellis's hands slap Parker's big ass, claw at the back of the
double-breasted jacket. The single vent in Mr. Parker's jacket is
torn open along the seam up the middle of his back to his collar.
Mr. Parker's hands, the heel of one hand crams a soggy, gnawed
eel-skin wallet between Ellis's capped teeth.
Ellis's face is dark red and shining the way you'd look if you got
the cherry pie in the pie eating contest. A runny finger painting
mess of nosebleed and tears, snot and drool.
Mr. Parker, his hair is fallen over his eyes. His other hand is a fist
around five inches of Ellis's pulled out-tongue.
Ellis's slapping and gagging between Mr. Parker's thick legs.
Broken Ming vases and other collectibles are all around them on
the floor.
Mr. Parker says, "That's right. Just do that. That's nice. Just
relax."
Brandy and me, watching.
Me wanting Ellis destroyed, this is all just too perfect to spoil.
I tug on Brandy. Brandy, honey. We better walk you back
upstairs. Rest you some more. Give you a nice fresh handful of
Benzedrine spansules.
and want to make them happy, but you still want to
make up your own rules.
The surgeons said, you can't just cut off a lump of skin
one place and bandage it on another. You're not grafting
a tree. The blood supply, the veins and capillaries just
wouldn't be hooked up to keep the graft alive. The lump
would just die and fall off.

It's scary, but now when I see somebody blush, my reac-
tion isn't: oh, how cute. A blush only reminds me how

blood is just under the surface of everything.
Doing dermabrasion, this one plastic surgeon told me, is
about the same as pressing a ripe tomato against a belt

sander. What you're paying for most is the mess.
To relocate a piece of skin, to rebuild a jaw, you have to
flay a long strip of skin from your neck. Cut up from the
base of your neck, but don't sever the skin at the top.
Picture a sort of banner or strip of skin hanging down
loose along your neck but still attached to the bottom of
your face. The skin is still attached to you, so it still gets
blood. This strip of skin is still alive. Take the strip of skin and
roll it into a tube or column. Leave it rolled until it heals
into a long, dangling lump of flesh, hanging from the
bottom of your face. Living tissue. Full of fresh, healthy
blood, flapping and dangling warm against your neck. This
is a pedicle.
Just the healing part, that can take months.
Clatter and tintinnabulation of ringing metal against
metal chimes and gongs in the car around us.
"Sorry, I guess," Brandy says. "There's shit on the floor, got
under the brake pedal when I tried to stop."
Music bright as silver rolls out from under our car seats.
Napkin rings and silver teaspoons rush forward against our
feet. Brandy's got candlesticks between her feet. A silver
platter bright with starlight is slid half out from under the
front of Brandy's seat, looking up between her long legs.
Brandy looks at me. Her chin tucked down, Brandy lowers
her Ray-Bans to the end of her nose and arches her penciled
eyebrows.
I shrug. I get out to liberate my love cargo.
Even with the trunk open, Manus doesn't move. His knees
are against his elbows, his hands clasped in his face, his feet
tucked back under his butt; Manus could be a fetus in army
fatigues. All around him, I hadn't noticed. I've been under a
lot of stress tonight, so forgive me if I didn't notice back at
Evie's house, but all around Manus flash pieces of silverware.
Pirate treasure in the trunk of his Fiat, and other things.
Relics.
A long white candle, there's a candle.
Brandy slams out of her seat and comes to look, too.
"Oh my shit," Brandy says and rolls her eyes. "Oh my shit."
There's an ashtray, no, it's a plaster cast of a little hand, "It's
okay."
There's a little rushing sound, the sound of rain on the roof of a
tent or a closed convertible.
"Oh, God," Brandy steps back. "Oh, sweet Christ!"
Manus blinks and peers at Brandy, then at his lap. One leg of his
army fatigues goes darker, darker, darker to the knee.
"Cute," Brandy says, "but he's just peed his pants."
Jump back to plastic surgery. Jump to the happy day you're
healed. You've had this long strip of skin hanging off your neck for
a couple months, only it's not just one strip. There are probably
more like a half-dozen pedicles because you might as well do a lot
at once so the plastic surgeon has more tissue to work with.
For reconstruction, you'll have these long dangling strips of
skin hanging off the bottom of your face for about two months.
They say that what people notice first about you is your eyes.
You'll give up that hope. You look like some meat byproduct ground
up and pooped out by the Num Num Snack Factory.
A mummy coming apart in the rain.

A broken pinata.
These strips of warm skin flapping around your neck are good,
blood-fed living tissue. The surgeon lifts each strip and attaches the
healed end to your face. This way,
Now Manus peers at me, sits up and scrapes his head on the
open trunk lid. Man, oh, man, you know this hurts, still it
isn't anything tragic until Brandy Alexander chimes in with
her overreaction. "Oh, you poor thing," she says.
Then Manus boo-hoos. Manus Kelley, the last person who
has any right to, is crying.
I hate this.
Jump to the day the skin grafts take, and even then the
tissue will need some support. Even if the grafts heal to
where they look like a crude, lumpy jaw, you'll still need a
jawbone. Without a mandible, the soft mass of tissue, living
and viable as it is, might just reabsorb.
That's the word the plastic surgeons used.
Reabsorb.
Into my face, as if I'm just a sponge made of skin.
Jump to Manus crying and Brandy bent over him, cooing
and petting his sexy hair.
In the trunk, there's a pair of bronze baby shoes, a silver
chafing dish, a turkey picture made of macaroni glued to
construction paper.
"You know," Manus sniffs and wipes the back of his hand
under his nose. "I'm high right now so it's okay if I tell you
this." Manus looks at Brandy bent over him and me crouched
in the dirt. "First," Manus says, "your parents, they give you
your life, but then they try to give you their life."
To make you a jawbone, the surgeons will break off parts
of your shinbones, complete with the attached artery. First
they expose the bone and sculpt it right there on your leg.
Another way is the surgeons will break several other
bones, probably long bones in your legs and arms. Inside these
bones is the soft cancellous bone pulp.
That was the surgeons' word and the word from the
books.
Cancellous.
"My mom," Manus says, "and her new husband—my
mom gets married a lot—they just bought this resort condo
in Bowling River in Florida. People younger than sixty can't
buy property there. That's a law they have."
I'm looking at Brandy, who's still the overreactive mother,
kneeling down, brushing the hair off Manus's forehead. I'm
looking over the cliff edge next to us. Those little blue lights in
all the houses, that's people watching television. Tiffany's light
blue. Valium blue. People in captivity.
First my best friend and now my brother is trying to steal
my fiance.
Jump to Manus sitting in his piss and silver in the trunk of
his red sports car. Potty training flashback. It happens.
Me, I'm crouched in front of him, looking for the bulge of
his wallet.
Manus just stares at Brandy. Probably thinking Brandy's
me, the old me with a face.
Brandy's lost interest. "He doesn't remember. He thinks

I'm his mother," Brandy says. "Sister, maybe, but mother?"
So deja vu. Try brother.
We need a place to stay, and Manus must have a new
place. Not thp ???
"I went to visit them at Christmas, last year," Manus says. "My
mom, their condo is right on the eighth green, and they love it. It's
like the whole age standard in Bowling River is fucked. My mom
and stepdad are just turned sixty, so they're just youngsters. Me, all
these oldsters are scoping me out like an odds-on car burglary."
Brandy licks her lips.
"According to the Bowling River age standard," Manus says, "I
haven't been born yet."
You have to break out large enough slivers of this soft, bloody
bone pulp. The cancellous stuff. Then you have to insert these
shards and slivers of bone into the soft mass of tissue you've
grafted onto your face.
Really, you don't do this, the surgeons do it all while you're
asleep.
If the slivers are close enough together, they'll form fibroblast
cells to bond with each other. Again, a word from the books.
Fibroblast.
Again, this takes months.
"My mom and her husband," Manus says, sitting in the open
trunk of his Fiat Spider on top of Rocky Butte, "for Christmas, their
biggest present to me is this box all wrapped up. It's the size of a
high-end stereo system or a wide-screen television. This is what
I'm hoping. I mean, it could've been anything else, and I
would've liked it more."
Manus slides one foot down to the ground, then the
other. On his feet, Manus turns back to the Fiat full of silver.
"No," Manus says, "they give me this shit."
Manus in his commando boots and army fatigues takes a
big fat-belly silver teapot out of the trunk and looks at himself
reflected fat in the convex side. "The whole box," Manus says,
"is full of all this shit and heirlooms that nobody else wants."
Just like me pitching Evie's crystal cigarette box against
the fireplace, Manus hauls off and fast pitches the teapot out
into the darkness. Over the cliff, out over the darkness and
the lights of suburbia, the teapot flies so far that you can't
hear it land.
Not turning around, Manus reaches back and grabs
another something. A silver candlestick. "This is my legacy,"
Manus says. Pitched overhand into the darkness, the
candlestick turns end over end, silent the way you imagine
satellites fly.
"You know," Manus pitches a glittering handful of
napkin rings, "how your parents are sort of like God. Sure,
you love them and want to know they're still around, but
you never really see them unless they want something."
The silver chafing dish flies up, up, up, to the stars and then
falls down to land somewhere among the blue TV lights.
And after the shards of bone have grown together to give
you a new jawbone inside the lump of grafted skin, then the
surgeon can try to shape this into something you can talk
with and eat with and keep slathered in make-up.
This is years of pain later.
Years of living in the hope that what you'll get will be

better than what you have. Years of looking and feeling
worse in the hope that you might look better.
Manus grabs the candle, the white candle from the trunk.
"My mom," Manus says, "her number two Christmas
present to me was a box full of all the stuff from when I was
a kid that she saved." Manus says, "Check it out," and holds up
the candle, "my baptism candle."
Off into the darkness, Manus pitches the candle.
The bronze baby shoes go next.
Wrapped in a christening gown.
Then a scattering handful of baby teeth.
"Fuck," Manus says, "the damn tooth fairy."
A lock of blond hair inside a locket on a chain, the chain
swinging and let go bola-style from Manus's hand, disappears
into the dark.
"She said she was giving me this stuff because she just didn't have
any room for it," Manus says. "It's not that she didn't want it."
The plaster print of the second-grade hand goes end over
end, off into the darkness.
"Well, Mom, if it isn't good enough for you," Manus says,
"I don't want to carry this shit around, either."
Jump to all the times when Brandy Alexander gets on me
about plastic surgery, then I think of pedicles. Reabsorb-tion.
Fibroblast cells. Cancellous bone. Years of pain and hope, and
how can I not laugh.
Laughter is the only sound left I can make that people will
understand.
Brandy, the well-meaning queen supreme with her tits
siliconed to the point she can't stand straight, she says: Just
look to see what's out there.
How can I stop laughing.
I mean it, Shane, I don't need the attention that bad.
I'll just keep wearing my veils.
If I can't be beautiful, I want to be invisible.
Jump to the silver punch ladle flying off to nowhere.
Jump to each teaspoon, gone.
Jump to all the grade school report cards and class pictures
sailed off.
Manus crumbles a thick piece of paper.
His birth certificate. And chucks it out of existence. Then Manus
stands rocking heel-toe, heel-toe, hugging himself.
Brandy is looking at me to say something. In the dirt, with my
finger I write:
manus where do you live these days?
Little cold touches land on my hair and peachy-pink shoulders.
It's raining.
Brandy says, "Listen, I don't want to know who you are, but if you
could be anybody, who would you be?"
"I'm not getting old, that's for sure" Manus says, shaking his
head. "No way." Arms crossed, he rocks heel-toe, heel-toe. Manus
tucks his chin to his chest and rocks, looking down at all the broken
bottles.
It's raining harder. You can't smell my smoky ostrich feathers or
Brandy's L'Air du Temps.
"Then you're Mr. Denver Omelet," Brandy says. "Denver
Omelet, meet Daisy St. Patience." Brandy's ring-beaded hand opens
to full flower and lays itself across her forty-six inches of siliconed

glory. "These," she says, "this is Brandy Alexander.”
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
Jump to this one time, nowhere special, just Brandy and
me in the speech therapist office when Brandy catches me with
my hands up under my veil, touching the seashells and ivory of my
exposed molars, stroking the embossed leather of my scar tissue,
dry and polished from my breath going back and forth across it.
I'm touching the saliva where it dries sticky and raw down the sides
of my neck, and Brandy says not to watch myself too close.
"Honey," she says, "times like this, it helps to think of yourself
as a sofa or a newspaper, something made by a lot of other people
but not made to last forever."

The open edge of my throat feels starched and plastic, ribbed-
knitted and stiff with sizing and interfacing. It's the same feel as

the top edge of a strapless dress or maillot, held up with wire
or plastic stays sewn inside. Hard but warm the way pink
looks. Bony but covered in soft, touchable skin.
This kind of acute traumatic mandibulectomy without
reconstruction, before decannulation of the tracheostomy
tube can lead to sleep apnea, the doctors said. This was them
talking to each other during morning rounds.
And people find me hard to understand.
What the doctors told me was unless they rebuilt me
some kind of jaw, at least some kind of flap, they said, I could
die any time I fell asleep. I could just stop breathing and not
wake up. A quick, painless death.
On my pad with my pen, I wrote:
don't tease.
Us in the speech therapist office, Brandy says, "It helps to
know you're not any more responsible for how you look than
a car is," Brandy says. "You're a product just as much. A
product of a product of a product. The people who design
cars, they're products. Your parents are products. Their parents
were products. Your teachers, products. The minister in your
church, another product," Brandy says.
Sometimes your best way to deal with shit, she says, is to
not hold yourself as such a precious little prize.
"My point being," Brandy says, "is you can't escape the
world, and you're not responsible for how you look, if you look
beauticious or butt ugly. You're not responsible for how you feel or
what you say or how you act or anything you do. It's all out of your
hands," Brandy says.
The same way a compact disk isn't responsible for what's
recorded on it, that's how we are. You're about as free to act as a
programmed computer. You're about as one-of-a-kind as a dollar
bill.
"There isn't any Teal you in you," she says. "Even your physical
body, all your cells will be replaced within eight years."
Skin, bones, blood, and organs transplant from person to
person. Even what's inside you already, the colonies of microbes and
bugs that eat your food for you, without them you'd die. Nothing
of you is all-the-way yours. All of you is inherited.
"Relax," Brandy says, "Whatever you're thinking, a million
other folks are thinking. Whatever you do, they're doing, and none
of you is responsible. All of you is a cooperative effort."

Up under my veil, I finger the wet poking stub of a tongue
from some vandalized product. The doctors suggested using part of
my small intestine to make my throat longer. They suggested carving
the shinbones, the fibulas of this human product I am, shaping the
bones and grafting them to build me, build the product, a new
jawbone.
On my pad, I wrote:
the leg-bone connected to the head-bone?
The doctors didn't get it.
Now hear the word of the Lord.
"You're a product of our language," Brandy says, "arid how our
laws are and how we believe our God wants us. Every bitty molecule
about you has already been thought out by some million people
before you," she says. "Anything you can do is boring and old and
perfectly okay. You're safe because you're so trapped inside your
culture. Anything you can conceive of is fine because you can conceive
of it. You can't imagine any way to escape. There's no way you can
get out," Brandy says.
"The world," Brandy says, "is your cradle and your trap."
This is after I backslid. I wrote to my hooker at the agency and
asked about my chances of getting hand or foot work. Modeling
watches and shoes. My hooker had sent me some flowers in the
hospital early on. Maybe I could pick up assignments as a leg
model. How much Evie had blabbed to them, I didn't know.
To be a hand model, he wrote back, you have to wear a size
seven glove and a size five ring. A foot model must have perfect
toenails and wear a size six shoe. A leg model can't play any sports.
She can't have any visible veins. Unless your fingers and toes
still look good printed in a magazine at three times their
normal size, or billboarded at two hundred times their size,
he wrote, don't count on body part work.
My hand's an eight. My foot, a seven.

Brandy says, "And if you can find any way out of our cul-
ture, then that's a trap, too. Just wanting to get out of the

trap reinforces the trap."
The books on plastic surgery, the pamphlets and
brochures all promised to help me live a more normal, happy
life; but less and less, this looked like what I'd want. What I
wanted looked more and more like what I'd always been
trained to want. What everybody wants.
Give me attention.
Flash.
Give me beauty.
Flash.
Give me peace and happiness, a loving relationship, and a
perfect home.
Flash.
Brandy says, "The best way is not to fight it, just go. Don't
be trying all the time to fix things. What you run from only
stays with you longer. When you fight something, you only
make it stronger.”
She says, "Don't do what you want." She says, "Do what you
don't want. Do what you're trained not to want."
It's the opposite of following your bliss.
Brandy tells me, "Do the things that scare you the most.”

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
In Seattle, I've been watching Brandy nap in our undersea
grotto for more than one hundred and sixty years. Me, I'm
sitting here with a glossy pile of brochures from surgeons
showing sexual reassignment surgeries. Transitional
transgender operations. Sex changes.
The color pictures show pretty much the same shot of
different-quality vaginas. Camera shots focused straight into
the dark vaginal introitus. Fingers with red nail polish cupped
against each thigh to spread the labia. The urethral meatus
soft and pink. The pubic hair clipped down to stubble on
some. The vaginal depth given as six inches, eight inches, two
inches. Unresected corpus spon-giosum mounding around the
urethral opening on some.
The clitoris hooded, the frenulum of the clitoris, the tiny folds
of skin under the hood that join the clitoris to the labia.
Bad, cheap vaginas with hair-growing scrotal skin used inside,
still growing hair, choked with hair.
Picture perfect, state-of-the-art vaginas lengthened using
sections of colon, self-cleaning and lubricated with its own mucosa.
Sensate clitorises made by cropping and rerouting bits of the glans
penis. The Cadillac of vagino-plasty. Some of these Cadillacs turn out
so successful the flood of colon mucosa means wearing a maxi-pad
every day.
Some are old-style vaginas where you had to stretch and dilate
them every day with a plastic mold. All these brochures are
souvenirs of Brandy's near future.

After we saw Mr. Parker sitting on Ellis, I helped the drug-
induced dead body Brandy might as well be back upstairs and took

her out of her clothes again. She coughed them back up when I
tried to slip any more Darvons down her throat, so I settled her
back on the bathroom floor, and when I folded her suit jacket over
my arm there was something cardboard tucked in the inside pocket.
The Miss Rona book. Tucked in the book is a souvenir of my own
future.
Kicked back on the big ceramic snail shell, I read: Hove Seth
Thomas so much I have to destroy him. I over-compensate by
worshiping the queen supreme. Seth will never love me. No one will
ever love me ever again.
How embarrassing.
Give me needy emotional whining bullshit.
Flash.
Give me self-absorbed egocentric twaddle.
Christ.
Fuck me. I'm so tired of being me. Me beautiful. Me ugly.
Blonde. Brunette. A million fucking fashion makeovers that
only leave me trapped being me.
Who I was before the accident is just a story now.
Everything before now, before now, before now, is just a story
I carry around. I guess that would apply to anybody in the
world. What I need is a new story about who I am.
What I need to do is fuck up so bad I can't save myself.
CHAPTER T W E N T Y - T H R E E

So this is life in the Brandy Alexander Witness Reincar-
nation Project.

In Santa Barbara, Manus who was Denver taught us how

to get drugs. The three of us were squeezed into that Fiat
Spider from Portland to Santa Barbara, and Brandy just
wanted to die. All the time, holding both hands pressed on
her lower back, Brandy kept saying, "Stop the car. I got to
stretch. I am spaz-am-ing. We have to stop."
It took us two days to drive from Oregon to California, and
the two states are right next door to each other. Manus
being all the time looking at Brandy, listening to her, in love
with her so obvious I only wanted to kill them in worse and
more painful ways.
In Santa Barbara, we're just into town when Brandy wants to
get out arid walk a little. Trouble is, this is a really good
neighborhood in California. Right up in the hills over Santa Barbara.
You walk around up here, the police or some private security patrol
cruises you and wants to know who you are and see some I.D.,
please.
Still, Brandy, she's spasming again, and the hysterical princess
has one leg over the door, half climbed out of the Spider before
Denver Omelet will even stop. What Brandy wants are the Tylox
capsules she left in Suite 15-G at the Congress Hotel.
"You can't be beautiful," Brandy says about a thousand times,
"until you feel beautiful."
Up here in the hills, we pull up curbside to an OPEN HOUSE
sign. The house looking down on us is a big hacienda, Spanish
enough to make you want to dance the flamenco on a table, swing
on a wrought-iron chandelier, wear a sombrero and a bandoleer.
"Here," Denver says to her. "Get yourselves pretty, and I'll show
you how we can scam some prescription painkillers."
Jump back to the three days we hid out in Denver's apartment
until we could get some cash together. Brandy, she's cooked up some
new plan. Before she goes under the knife she's decided to find her
sister.
The me who wants to dance on her grave.
"A vaginoplasty is pretty much forever," she says. "It can
wait while I figure some things out."
She's decided to find her sister and tell her everything,
about the gonorrhea, about why Shane's not dead, what
happened, everything. Make a clean break of it. Probably
she'd be surprised how much her sister already knows.
I just want to be out of town in case a felony arson arrest
warrant is in the pipeline, so I threaten Denver, if he won't
come with us, I'll run to the police and accuse him. Of arson,
of kidnapping, of attempted murder. To Evie, I mail a letter.
To Brandy, I write:
let's drive around some, see what happens, chill.
This seems a little labor intensive, but we've all got
something to run from. And when I say we, I mean everybody in
the world. So Brandy thinks we're on tour to find her sister,
and Denver's come along by blackmail. My letter to Evie's
sitting in her mailbox at the end of her driveway leading up
to her burned-up ruins of a house. Evie's in Cancun, maybe.
The letter to Evie says:
To Miss Evelyn Cottrell,
Manus says he shot me and you helped him 'cuz of your filthy
relationship. In order for you to stay out of PRISON, please seek
an insurance settlement for the damage to your home and
personal property as soon as possible. Convert this entire

settlement into United
States funds, tens and twenties, and mail them to me
care of General Delivery in Seattle, Washington. I am the
person you are responsible for being without a fiance, your
former best friend, no matter what lies you tell yourself. Send
the money and I will consider the matter dealt with and will
not go to the police and have you arrested and sent to
PRISON, where you will have to fight day and night for your
dignity and life but no doubt lose them both. Yes, and I've
had major reconstructive surgery, so I look even better than
myself, and I have Manus Kelley with me and he still loves me
and says he hates you and will testify against you in court
that you're a bitch. Signed, Me
Jump to above the edge of the Pacific Ocean, parked
curb-side at the Spanish hacienda OPEN HOUSE. Denver tells
Brandy and me how to go upstairs while he keeps the
realtor busy. The master bedroom will have the best view,
that's how to find it. The master bathroom will have the
best drugs.
Sure, Manus used to be a police vice detective, if you
consider wagging your butt around the bushes in
Washington Park wearing a Speedo bikini a size too small
and hoping some lonely sex hound will whip his dick out, if
that's detective work, then, sure, Manus was a detective.
Because beauty is power the way money is power the way
a loaded gun is power. And Manus with his square-jawed,
cheekboned good looks could be a Nazi recruiting poster.
While Manus was still fighting crime, I found him cutting
the crust off a slice of bread one morning. Bread without
crust made me remember being little. This was so sweet, but
I thought he was making me toast. Then Manus goes to in
front of a mirror in the apartment we used to share, wearing
his white Speedo, and he asks, if I were a gay guy would I
want to bang him up the butt? Then he changed to a red
Speedo and asked again. You know, he says, really stuff his
poop chute? Plow the cowboy? It's not a morning I would
want on video.
"What I need," Manus said, "is for my basket to look big,
but my ass to look adolescent." He takes the slice of bread
and stuffs it inside between himself and the crotch of the
Speedo. "Don't worry, this is how underwear models get a
better look," he says. "You get a smooth unoffen-sive bulge
this way." He stands sideways to the mirror and says, "You
think I need another slice?"
His being a detective meant he crunched around in good
weather, in his sandals and his lucky red Speedo, while two
plainclothes men nearby in a parked car waited for
somebody to take the bait. This happened more than you'd
imagine. Manus was a one-man campaign to clean up
Washington Park. He'd never been this successful as a regular
policeman and this way nobody ever shot at him.
It all felt very Bond, James Bond. Very cloak and dagger. Very spy
versus spy. Plus he was getting a great tan. Plus he got to tax
deduct his gym membership and his buying new Speedos.
Jump to the realtor in Santa Barbara shaking my hand and
saying my name, Daisy St. Patience, over and over the way you do
when you want to make a good impression but not looking at me in

my veils. He's looking at Brandy and Denver.
Charmed, I'm sure.
The house is just what you'd expect from the outside. There's a
big scarred mission-style trestle table in the dining room, under a
wrought-iron chandelier you could swing on. Laid across the table
is a silver-embroidered, fringed Spanish shawl.
We represent a television personality who wishes to remain
nameless, Denver tells the realtor. We're an advance team
scouting for a weekend home for this nameless celebrity. Miss
Alexander, she's an expert in product toxicity, you know, the lethal
fumes and secretions given off by homes.
"New carpet," Denver says, "will exude poisonous formaldehyde
for up to two years after it's been laid."
Brandy says, "I know that feeling.”
It got so that when Manus's crotch wasn't leading men to
their doom, Manus was three-piece-suited in court on the
witness stand, saying how the defendant approached him in
some lurid exposed public masturbating way and asked for a
cigarette.
"Like anybody could look at me and think I smoke,"
Manus would say.
You didn't know what vice he objected to more.
After Santa Barbara, we drove to San Francisco and sold the
Fiat Spider. Me, I'm writing on cocktail napkins all the time:
maybe your sister's in the next city, she could be anywhere.
In the Santa Barbara hacienda, Brandy and me found
Benzedrine and Dexedrine and old Quaaludes and Soma and
some Dialose capsules that turned out to be a fecal softener.
And some Solaquin Forte cream that turned out to be a skin
bleach.
In San Francisco, we sold the Fiat and some drugs and
bought a big red Physicians' Desk Reference book so we
wouldn't be stealing worthless fecal softeners and skin
bleaches. In San Francisco, old people are all over selling their
big rich houses full of drugs and hormones. We had Demerol
and Darvocet-Ns. Not the puny little Darvocet-N 50s. Brandy
was feeling beautiful with me trying to O.D. her on big
Darvocet 100-milligram jobbers.
After the Fiat, we rented a big Seville convertible. Just between
us, we were the Zine kids:
Me, I was Comp Zine.
Denver was Thor Zine.
Brandy, Stella Zine.
It was in San Francisco I started Denver on his own secret
hormone therapy to destroy him.
Manus's detective career had started to peter out when his arrest
rate dropped to one per day, then one per week, then zero, then still
zero. The problem was the sun, the tanning, and the fact he was
getting older and he was a known bait, none of the older men he
had already arrested went near him. The younger men just thought
he was too old.
So Manus got bold. More and more his Speedos got smaller,
which wasn't a good look, either. The pressure was on to replace
him with a new model. So now he'd have to start conversations.
Talk. Be funny. Really work at meeting guys. Develop a personality,
and still the younger men, the only ones who didn't run when they
saw him, a younger man would still decline when Manus suggested

they take a walk back into the trees, into the bushes.
Even the most horny young men with their eyes scamming
everybody else would say, "Uh, no thanks."
Or, "I just want to be alone right now."
Or worse, "Back off, you old troll, or I'll call a cop.”
After San Francisco and San Jose and Sacramento, we
went to Reno and Brandy turned Denver Omelet into Chase
Manhattan. We zigzagged everywhere I thought we'd find
enough drugs. Evie's money could wait.
Jump to Las Vegas and Brandy turns Chase Manhattan into
Eberhard Faber. We drive the Seville down the gut of Las
Vegas. All that spasming neon, the red chase lights going one
direction, white chase lights going the other direction. Las
Vegas looks the way you'd imagine heaven must look at night.
We never put the top up on the Seville, had it two weeks,
never put the top up.
Cruising the gut of Las Vegas, Brandy sat on the boot with
her ass up on the trunk lid and her feet on the back seat,
wearing this strapless metallic brocade sheath as pink as the
burning center of a road flare with a bejeweled bodice and a
detachable long silk taffeta cape with balloon sleeves.
With her looking that good, Las Vegas with all its flash and
dazzle was just another Brandy Alexander brand fashion
accessory.
Brandy puts her arms up, wearing these long, pink opera
gloves, and just howls. She just looks and feels so good at that
moment. And the detachable long silk taffeta cape with
balloon sleeves, it detaches.
And sails off into Las Vegas traffic.
"Go around the block," Brandy screams. "That cape has to go
back to Bullock's in the morning."
After Manus's detective career started downhill, we'd have to
work out in the gym every day, twice on some days. Aerobics,
tanning, nutrition, every station of the cross. He was a
bodybuilder, if what that means is you drink your meal
replacement shakes right out of the blender six times a day over
the kitchen sink. Then Manus would get swimwear through the
mail you couldn't buy in this country, little pouches on strings and
microfilament technology he'd put on the moment we got home
from the gym, then follow me around asking, did I think his butt
looked too flat?
If I was a gay guy, did I think he needed to trim back his pubic
hair? Me being a gay guy, would I think he looked too desperate?
Too aloof? Was his chest big enough? Too big, maybe?
"I'd hate for guys to think I'm just a big dumb cow is all,"
Manus would say.
Did he look, you know, too gay? Gay guys only wanted guys who
acted straight.
"I don't want guys to see me as a big passive bottom," Manus
would say. "It's not like I'd just flop there and let just any guy bone
me."
Manus would leave a ring of shaved hairs and bronzer scum
around the bathtub and expect me to scrub.
Always in the background was the idea of going back to
an assignment where people shot at you, criminals with
nothing to lose if you got killed.
And maybe Manus could bust some old tourist who found

the cruisy part of Washington Park by accident, but most days
the precinct commander was on him to start training a
younger replacement.
Most days, Manus would untangle a silver metallic tiger
stripe string bikini out of the knotted mess in his underwear
drawer. He'd strain his ass into this little A-cup nothing and
look at himself in the mirror sideways, frontways, backwards,
then tear it off and leave the stretched, dead little animal
print on the bed for me to find. This would go on through
zebra stripes, tiger stripes, leopard spots, then cheetah,
panther, puma, ocelot, until he ran out of time.
"These are my lucky lifeguard 'kinis," he'd tell me. "Be
honest."
And this is what I kept telling myself was love.
Be honest? I wouldn't know where to start. I was so out of
practice.
After Las Vegas, we rented one of those family vans.
Eberhard Faber became Hewlett Packard. Brandy wore a long,
white cotton pique dress with open strappy sides and a high
slit up the skirt that was totally inappropriate for the entire
state of Utah. We stopped and tasted the Great Salt Lake.
This just seemed like the thing to do.
I was always writing in the sand, writing in the dust on the
car:
maybe your sister is in the next town.
Writing: here, take a few more Vicodins.
It was after Manus couldn't get guys to approach him for
sex that he started into buying man-on-man sex magazines
and going out to gay clubs.
"Research," he'd say.
"You can come with," he'd tell me, "but don't stand too
close, I don't want to send out the wrong signal."
After Utah, Brandy turned Hewlett Packard into Harper
Collins in Butte. There in Montana, we rented a Ford Probe
and Harper drove with me squashed in the back seat, and
every once in a while Harper would say, "We're going one
hundred and ten miles an hour."
Brandy and me, we'd shrug.
Speeding didn't seem like anything in a place as big as
Montana.
maybe your sister's not even in the united states, I
wrote in lipstick on a bathroom mirror in a motel in Great Palls,
So to keep Manus's job, we went out to gay bars, and I sat
alone and told myself that it was different for men, the
good looks thing was. Manus flirted and danced and sent
drinks down the bar to whoever looked like a challenge.
Manus would slip onto the bar stool next to mine and
whisper out the side of his mouth.
"I can't believe he's with that guy," he'd say.
Manus would nod just enough for me to figure out
which guy.
"Last week, he wouldn't give me the time of day,"
Manus would rant under his breath. "I wasn't good
enough, and that trashy, bottle-blonde piece of garbage is
supposed to be better?"
Manus would hunch over his drink and say, "Guys are so
fucked up."

And I'd be, like, no duh.
And I told myself it was okay. Any relationship I could be in
would have these rough times.
Jump to Calgary, Alberta, where Brandy ate Nebalino
suppositories wrapped in gold foil because she thought they
were Almond Roca. She got so ripped, she turned Harper
Collins into Addison Wesley. Most of Calgary, Brandy wore a
white, quilted ski jacket with a faux fur collar and a white
bikini bottom by Donna Karan. The look was fun and
spirited and we felt light and popular.
Evenings called for a black and white striped floor-length
coat dress that Brandy could never keep buttoned up, with
black wool hot pants on underneath. Addison Wesley turned
into Nash Rambler, and we rented another Cadillac.
Jump to Edmonton, Alberta, Nash Rambler turned into Alfa
Romeo. Brandy wore these crinoline shorty-short square
dance petticoats over black tights tucked into cowboy boots.
Brandy wore this push-up bustier made of leather with local
cattle brands burned all over it.
In a nice hotel bar in Edmonton, Brandy says, "I hate it
when you can see the seam in your martini glass. I mean, I
can feel the mold line. It's so cheap."
Guys all over her. Like spotlights, I remember that kind
of attention. That whole country, Brandy never had to buy
her own drinks, not once.
Jump to Manus losing his assignment as an independent
special contract vice operative to the detective division of the
Metropolitan police department. My point is, he never really
got over it.
He was running out of money. It's not like there was a lot
in the bank to begin with. Then the birds ate my face.
What I didn't know is, there was Evie Cottrell living alone
in her big lonesome house with all her Texas land and oil
money, saying, hey, she had some work that needed doing.
And Manus with his driving need to prove he can still pee on
every tree. That mirror-mirror kind of power. The rest you
already know.
Jump to us on the road, after the hospital, after the Rhea
sisters, and I keep slipping the hormones, the Provera and
Climara and Premarin, into what he ate and drank. Whiskey
and estradiol. Vodka and ethinyl estradiol. It was so easy it was
scary. He was all the time making big cow eyes at Brandy.
We were all running from something. Vaginoplasty.
Aging. The future.
Jump to Los Angeles.
Jump to Spokane.
Jump to Boise and San Diego and Phoenix.
Jump to Vancouver, British Columbia, where we were
Italian expatriates speaking English as a second language until
there wasn't a native tongue among us.
"You have two of the breasts of a young woman," Alfa
Romeo told a realtor I can't remember in which house.
From Vancouver, we reentered the United States as
Brandy, Seth, and Bubba-Joan via the Princess Princess's very
professional mouth. All the way to Seattle, Brandy read to us how a
little Jewish girl with a mysterious muscle disease turned herself
into Rona Barrett.

All of us looking at big rich houses, picking up drugs, renting
cars, buying clothes, and taking clothes back.
"Tell us a gross personal story," Brandy says en route to Seattle.
Brandy all the time being the boss of me. Being this close to death
herself.
Rip yourself open.
Tell me my life story before I die.
Sew yourself shut.
CHAPTER T W E N T Y - F O U R
Jump way back to a fashion shoot at this slaughterhouse where
whole pigs without their insides hang as thick as fringe from a
moving chain. Evie and me wear Bibo Kelley stainless steel party
dresses while the chain zips by behind us at about a hundred pigs an
hour, and Evie says, "After your brother was mutilated, then
what?"
The photographer looks at his light meter and says, "Nope. No
way."
The art director says, "Girls, we're getting too much glare off
the carcasses."
Each pig goes by big as a hollow tree, all red and shining inside
and covered in this really nice pigskin on the outside just after
someone's singed the hair off with a blowtorch. This makes me
feel all stubbly by comparison, and I have to count back to my
last waxing.
And Evie goes, "Your brother?"
And I'm, like, counting Friday, Thursday, Wednesday,
Tuesday . . .
"How did he go from being mutilated to being dead?" Evie
says.
These pigs keep going by too fast for the art director to
powder down their shine. You have to wonder how pigs keep
their skin so nice. If now farmers use sunblock or what.
Probably, I figure it's been a month since I was as smooth as
they are. The way some salons use their new lasers, even with
the cooling gel, they might as well use a blowtorch.
"Space girl," Evie says to me. "Phone home."
The whole pig place is refrigerated too much to wear a
stainless steel dress around. Guys in white A-line coats and
boots with low heels get to spray super-heated steam in
where the pigs insides were, and I'm ready to trade them
jobs. I'm ready to trade jobs with the pigs, even. To Evie, I say,
"The police wouldn't buy the hairspray story. They were sure
my father had raged on Shane's face. Or my mom had put the
hairspray can in the trash. They called it 'neglect.'"
The photographer says, "What if we regroup and backlight
the carcasses?"
"Too much strobe effect as they go past," the art director
says.
Evie says, "Why'd the police think that?"
"Beats me," I say. "Somebody just kept making anonymous
calls to them."
The photographer says, "Can we stop the chain?"
The art director says, "Not unless we can stop people from
eating meat."
We're still hours away from taking a real break, and Evie
says, "Somebody lied to the police?"

The pig guys are checking us out, and some are pretty
cute. They laugh and slide their hands up and down fast on
their shiny black steamhoses. Curling their tongues at us.
Flirting.
"Then Shane ran away," I tell Evie. "Simple as that. A
couple years ago, my folks got a call he was dead."
We step back as close as we can to the pigs going by, still
warm. The floor seems to be really greasy, and Evie starts
telling me about an idea she has for a remake of Cinderella,
only instead of the little birds and animals making her a
dress, they do cosmetic surgery. Bluebirds give her a facelift.
Squirrels give her implants. Snakes, liposuction. Plus,
Cinderella starts out as a lonely little boy.
"As much attention as he got," I tell Evie, "I'd bet my
brother put that hairspray can in the fire himself.”
CHAPTER T W E N T Y - F I V E
Jump to one time, nowhere special, just Brandy and me
shopping along a main street of stores in some Idaho town
with a Sears outlet, a diner, a day-old bakery store, and a
realtor's office with our own Mr. White Westing-house gone
inside to hustle some realtor. We go into a secondhand dress
shop. This is next door to the day-old bargain bakery, and
Brandy says how her father used to pull this stunt with pigs
just before he took them to market. She says how he used to
feed them expired desserts he bought by the truckload from
this kind of bakery outlet. Sunlight comes down on us
through clean air. Bears and mountains are within walking
distance.
Brandy looks at me over a rack of secondhand dresses.
"You know about that kind of scam? The one with the pigs,
sweetness?" she says.
He used to stovepipe potatoes, her father. You hold the burlap
bag open and stand a length of stovepipe inside. All around the
pipe, you put big potatoes from this year's crop. Inside the pipe you
put last year's soft, bruised, cut, and rotting potatoes so folks can't
see them from through the burlap. You pull the stovepipe out, and
you stitch the bag shut tight so nothing inside can shift. You sell
them roadside with your kids helping, and even at a cheap price,
you're making money.
We had a Ford that day in Idaho. It was brown inside and out.
Brandy pushes the hangers apart, checking out every dress on
the rack and says, "You ever hear of anything in your whole life so
underhanded?"
Jump to Brandy and me in a secondhand store on that same
main street, behind a curtain, crowded together in a fitting room
the size of a phone booth. Most of the crowding is a ball gown
Brandy needs me to help get her into, a real Grace Kelly of a dress
with Charles James written all over it. Baffles and plenums and all
that high-stressed skeletoning engineered inside a skin of shot pink
organza or ice blue velveteen.
These most incredible dresses, Brandy tells me, the
constructed ball gowns, the engineered evening dresses with
their hoops and strapless bodices, their stand-up horseshoe
collars and flaring shoulders, nipped waists, their stand-away

peplums and bones, they never last very long. The tension, the
push and pull of satin and crepe de Chine trying to control
the wire and boning inside, the battle of fabric against
metal, this tension will shred them. As the outsides age, the
fabric, the part you can see, as it gets weak, the insides start to
poke and tear their way out.
Princess Princess, she says, "It will take at least three
Darvons to get me into this dress."
She opens her hand, and I shake out the prescription.
Her father, Brandy says, he used to grind his beef with
crushed ice to force it full of water before he sold it. He'd
grind beef with what's called bull meal to force it full of
cereal.

"He wasn't a bad person," she says. "Not outside of fol-
lowing the rules a little too much."

Not the rules about being fair and honest, she says, so
much as the rules about protecting your family from poverty.
And disease.
Some nights, Brandy says, her father used to creep into her
room while she was asleep.
I don't want to hear this. Brandy's diet of Provera and
Darvon has side-effected her with this kind of emotional
bulimia where she can't keep down any nasty secret. I
smooth my veils over my ears. Thank you for not sharing.
"My father used to sit on my bed some nights," she says,
"and wake me up."
Our father.

The ball gown is resurrected glorious on Brandy's shoul-
ders, brought back to life, larger than life and fairy tale

impossible to wear any place in the past fifty years. A zipper
thick as my spine goes up the side to just under Brandy's
arm. The panels of the bodice pinch Brandy off at her waist
and explode her out the top, her breasts, her bare arms and
long neck. The skirt is layered pale yellow silk faille and tulle.
It's so much gold embroidery and seed pearls would make any
bit of jewelry too much.
"It's a palace of a dress," Brandy says, "but even with the
drugs, it hurts."
The broke ends of the wire stays poke out around the
neck, poke in at the waist. Panels of plastic whalebone, their
corners and sharp edges jab and cut. The silk is hot, the tulle,
rough. Just her breathing in and out makes the clashing steel
and celluloid tucked inside, hidden, just Brandy being alive
makes it bite and chew at the fabric and her skin.
Jump to at night, Brandy's father, he used to say, hurry.
Get dressed. Wake your sister.
Me.
Get your coats on and get in the back of the truck, he'd say.
And we would, late after the TV stations had done the national
anthem and gone off the air. Concluded their broadcast day. Nothing
was on the road except us, our folks in the cab of the pickup and us
two in the back, Brandy and his sister, curled on our sides against the
corrugated floor of the truck bed, the squeak of the leaf springs, the
hum of the driveline coming right into us. The potholes bounce our
pumpkin heads hard on the floor of the bed. Our hands clamp tight
over our faces to keep from breathing the sawdust and dried manure
blowing around leftover. Our eyes shut tight to keep out the same. We

were going we didn't know where, but tried to figure out. A right
turn, then a left turn, then a long straight stretch going we didn't
know how fast, then another right turn would roll us over on our left
sides. We didn't know how long. You couldn't sleep.
Wearing the dress to shreds and holding very still, Brandy says, "You
know, I've been on my own pretty much since I was sixteen."
With every breath, even her taking shallow Darvon overdosed
little gulps of air, Brandy winces. She says, "There was an accident
when I was fifteen, and at the hospital, the police accused my
father of abusing me. It just went on and on. I couldn't tell them
anything because there was nothing to tell."
She inhales and winces, "The interviews, the counseling, the
intervention therapy, it just went on and on."
The pickup truck slowed and bounced off the edge of the
blacktop, onto gravel or washboard dirt, and the whole truck
bounced and rattled a while farther, then stopped.
This is how poor we were.
Still in the truck bed, you took your hands off your face, and
we'd be stopped. The dust and manure would settle. Brandy's
father would drop the tailgate of the truck, and you'd be on a
dirt road alongside a looming broken wall of boxcars laying this
way and that off their tracks. Boxcars would be broken open.
Flatcars would be rolled over with their loads of logs or two-by-fours
scattered. Tanker cars buckled and leaking. Hoppers full of coal or
wood chips would be heaved over and dumped out in black or gold
piles. The fierce smell of ammonia. The good smell of cedar. The
sun would be just under the horizon with light coming around to
us from underneath the world.
There'd be lumber to load on the truck. Cases of instant
butterscotch pudding. Cases of typing paper, toilet paper, double-A
batteries, toothpaste, canned peaches, books. Crushed diamonds
of safety glass'd be everywhere around car carriers tipped sideways
with the brand-new cars inside wrecked, with their clean, black tires
in the air.
Brandy lifts the gown's neckline and peeks inside at her
Estraderm patch on one breast. She peels the backing off another
patch and pastes it on her other breast, then takes another stabbing
breath and winces.
"The whole mess died down after about three months, the
whole child abuse investigation," Brandy says. "Then one basketball
practice, I'm getting out of the gym and a man comes up. He's with
the police, he says, and this is a confidential follow-up interview."
Brandy inhales, winces. She lifts the neckline again and takes
out a Methadone disket from between her breasts, bites off half
of it and drops the rest back inside.
The fitting room is hot and small with the two of us and that
huge civil engineering project of a dress packed together.
Brandy says, "Darvon." She says, "Quick, please." And she snaps
her fingers.
I fish out another red and pink capsule, and she gulps it dry.
"This guy," Brandy says, "he asks me to get in his car, to talk, just
to talk, and he asks if I have anything I'd like to say that maybe I
was too afraid to tell any of the child service people.”
The dress is coming apart, the silk opening at every seam,
the tulle busting out, and Brandy says, "This guy, this
detective, I tell him, 'No,' and he says, 'Good.' He says he likes a
kid who can keep a secret."

At a train wreck you could pick up pencils two thousand at a
time. Light bulbs still perfect and not rattling inside. Key blanks
by the hundreds. The pickup truck could only hold so much,
and by then other trucks would be arrived with people
shoveling grain into car backseats and people watching us
with our piles of too much as we decided what we needed
more, the ten thousand shoelaces or one thousand jars of
celery salt. The five hundred fan belts all one size we didn't
need but could re-sell, or the double-A batteries. The case of
shortening we couldn't use up before it went rancid or the
three hundred cans of hairspray
"The police guy," Brandy says, and every wire is rising out
of her tight yellow silk, "he puts his hand on me, right up
the leg of my shorts, and he says we don't have to re-open
the case. We don't have to cause my family any more
problems." Brandy says, "This detective says the police want
to arrest my father for suspicion. He can stop them, he says. He
says, it's all up to me."
Brandy inhales and the dress shreds, she breathes and
every breath makes her naked in more places.
"What did I know," she says. "I was fifteen. I didn't
know anything."
In a hundred torn holes, bare skin shows through.
At the train wreck, my father said security would be
here any minute.
How I heard this was: we'd be rich. We'd be secure. But
what he really meant was we'd have to hurry or we'd get
caught and lose it all.
Of course I remember.

"The police guy," Brandy says, "he was young, twenty-
one or twenty-two. He wasn't some dirty old man. It wasn't

horrible," she says, "but it wasn't love."
With more of the dress torn, the skeleton springs apart
in different places.
"Mostly," Brandy says, "it made me confused for a long
time."
That's my growing up, those kind of train wrecks. Our
only dessert from the time I was six to the time I was nine

was butterscotch pudding. It turns out I loathe butter-
scotch. Even the color. Especially the color. And the taste.

And smell.

How I met Manus was when I was eighteen a great-
looking guy came to the door of my parents' house and

asked, did we ever hear back from my brother after he ran
away?
The guy was a little older, but not out of the ballpark.
Twenty-five, tops. He gave me a card that said Manus Kelley.
Independent Special Contract Vice Operative. The only thing
else I noticed was he didn't wear a wedding ring. He said,
"You know, you look a lot like your brother." He had a
glorious smile and said, "What's your name?"
"Before we go back to the car," Brandy says, "I have to tell

you something about your friend. Mr. White Westing-
house."

Formerly Mr. Chase Manhattan, formerly Nash Rambler,
formerly Denver Omelet, formerly independent special
contract vice operative Manus Kelley. I do the homework:

Manus is thirty years old. Brandy's twenty-four. When
Brandy was sixteen I was fifteen. When Brandy was sixteen,
maybe Manus was already part of our lives.
I don't want to hear this.
The most beautiful ancient perfect dress is gone. The silk
and tulle have slipped, dropped, slumped to the fitting room
floor, and the wire and boning is broken and sprung away,
leaving just some red marks already fading on Brandy's skin
with Brandy left standing way too close to me in just her
underwear.
"It's funny," Brandy says, "but this isn't the first time I've
destroyed somebody's beautiful dress," and a big Aubergine
Dreams eye winks at me. Her breath and skin feel warm, she's
that close.
"The night I ran away from home," Brandy says, "I
burned almost every stitch of clothing my family had hanging
on the clothesline."

Brandy knows about me, or she doesn't know. She's con-
fessing her heart, or she's teasing me. If she knows, she could

be lying to me about Manus. If she doesn't know, then the
man I love is a freaky creepy sexual predator.
Either Manus or Brandy is being a sleazy liar to me, me,
the paragon of virtue and truth here. Manus or Brandy, I
don't know who to hate.
Me and Manus or Me and Brandy. It wasn't horrible, but it
wasn't love.
CHAPTER T W E N T Y - S I X
I here had to be some better way to kill Brandy. To set me
free. Some quick permanent closure. Some kind of crossfire I
could walk away from. Evie hates me by now. Brandy looks
just like I used to. Manus is still so in love with Brandy he'd
follow her anywhere, even if he's not sure why. All I'd have to
do is get Brandy cross-haired in front of Evie's rifle.
Bathroom talk.
Brandy's suit jacket with its sanitary little waist and mod
three-quarter sleeves is still folded on the aquamarine
countertop beside the big clamshell sink. I pick up the jacket,
and my souvenir from the future falls out. It's a postcard of
clean, sun-bleached 1962 skies and an opening day Space Needle.
You could look out the bathroom's porthole windows and see
what's become of the future. Overrun with Goths wearing sandals
and soaking lentils at home, the future I wanted is gone. The
future I was promised. Everything I expected. The way everything
was supposed to turn out. Happiness and peace and love and
comfort.
When did the future, Ellis once wrote on the back of a
postcard, switch from being a promise to a threat?
I tuck the postcard between the vaginoplasty brochures and the
labiaplasty handouts stuck between the pages of the Miss Rona
book. On the cover is a satellite photo of Hurricane Blonde just off
the West Coast of her face. The blonde is crowded with pearls and
what could be diamonds sparkle here and there.
She looks very happy. I put the book back in the inside pocket of
Brandy's jacket. I pick up the cosmetics and drugs scattered across
the countertops and I put them away. Sun comes through the
porthole windows at a low, low angle, and the post office will be

closing soon. There's still Evie's insurance money to pick up. At least
a half million dollars, I figure. What you can do with all that
money, I don't know, but I'm sure I'll find out.
Brandy's lapsed into major hair emergency status so I shake her.
Brandy's Aubergine Dreams eyes flicker, blink, flicker, squint.
Her hair, it's gotten all flat in the back.
Brandy comes up on one elbow. "You know," she says, "I'm
on drugs so it's all right if I tell you this." Brandy looks at me
bent over her, offering a hand up. "I have to tell you,"
Brandy says, "but I do love you." She says, "I can't tell how
this is for you, but I want us to be a family."
My brother wants to marry me.
I give Brandy a hand up. Brandy leans on me, Brandy, she
leans on the edge of the countertop. She says, "This wouldn't
be a sister thing." Brandy says, "I still have some days left in my
Real Life Training."
Stealing drugs, selling drugs, buying clothes, renting
luxury cars, taking clothes back, ordering blender drinks, this
isn't what I'd call Real Life, not by a long shot.
Brandy's ring-beaded hands open to full flower and
spread the fabric of her skirt across her front. "I still have all
my original equipment," she says.
The big hands are still patting and smoothing Brandy's
crotch as she turns sideways to the mirror and looks at her
profile. "It was supposed to come off after a year, but then I
met you," she says. "I had my bags packed in the Congress
Hotel for weeks just hoping you'd come to rescue me."
Brandy turns her other side to the mirror and searches. "I
just loved you so much, I thought maybe it's not too late?"
Brandy spreads pot gloss across her top lip and then her
bottom lip, blots her lips on a tissue, and drops the big
lumbago kiss into the snail shell toilet. Brandy says with her
new lips. "Any idea how to flush this thing?"
Hours I sat on that toilet, and no, I never saw how to
flush it. I step out into the hallway so if Brandy wants to blab
at me she'll have to follow.
Brandy stumbles in the bathroom doorway where the tile
meets the hallway carpet. Her one shoe, the heel is broken.
Her stocking is run where it rubbed the doorframe. She's
grabbed at a towel rack for balance and chipped her nail
polish.
Shining anal queen of perfection, she says, "Fuck."
Princess Princess, she yells after me, "It's not that I really
want to be a woman." She yells, "Wait up!" Brandy yells, "I'm
only doing this because it's just the biggest mistake I can
think to make. It's stupid and destructive, and anybody you
ask will tell you I'm wrong. That's why I have to go through
with it."
Brandy says, "Don't you see? Because we're so trained to do
life the right way. To not make mistakes" Brandy says, "I
figure, the bigger the mistake looks, the better chance I'll
have to break out and live a real life."
Like Christopher Columbus sailing toward disaster at the
edge of the world.
Like Fleming and his bread mold.
"Our real discoveries come from chaos," Brandy yells, "from
going to the place that looks wrong and stupid and foolish."

Her imperial voice everywhere in the house, she yells, "You
do not walk away from me when I take a minute to explain
myself!"
Her example is a woman who climbs a mountain, there's
no rational reason for climbing that hard, and to some
people it's a stupid folly, a misadventure, a mistake. A
mountain climber, maybe she starves and freezes, exhausted
and in pain for days, and climbs all the way to the top. And
maybe she's changed by that, but all she has to show for it is
her story.
"But me," Brandy says, still in the bathroom doorway, still
looking at her chipped nail polish, "I'm making the same
mistake only so much worse, the pain, the money, the time,
and being dumped by my old friends, and in the end my
whole body is my story."
A sexual reassignment surgery is a miracle for some
people, but if you don't want one, it's the ultimate form of
self-mutilation.
She says, "Not that it's bad being a woman. This might be
wonderful, if I wanted to be a woman. The point is," Brandy
says, "being a woman is the last thing I want. It's just the
biggest mistake I could think to make."
So it's the path to the greatest discovery.
It's because we're so trapped in our culture, in the being of
being human on this planet with the brains we have, and the
same two arms and two legs everybody has. We're so trapped
that any way we could imagine to escape would be just
another part of the trap. Anything we want, we're trained to
want.

"My first idea was to have one arm and one leg ampu-
tated, the left ones, or the right ones," she looks at me and

shrugs, "but no surgeon would agree to help me."
She says, "I considered AIDS, for the experience, but
then everybody had AIDS and it looked so mainstream and
trendy." She says, "That's what the Rhea sisters told my
birth family, I'm pretty sure. Those bitches can be so
possessive."
Brandy pulls a pair of white gloves out of her handbag,
the kind of gloves with a white pearl button on the inside
of each wrist. She works each hand into a glove and does
the button. White is not a good color choice. In white, her
hands look transplanted from a giant cartoon mouse.
"Then I thought, a sex change," she says, "a sexual
reassignment surgery. The Rheas," she says, "they think
they're using me, but really I'm using them for their
money, for their thinking they were in control of me and
this was all their idea."
Brandy lifts her foot to look at the broken heel, and she
sighs. Then she reaches down to take off the other shoe.
"None of this was the Rhea sisters' pushing. It wasn't. It
was just the biggest mistake I could make. The biggest
challenge I could give myself."
Brandy snaps the heel off her one good shoe, leaving
her feet in two ugly flats.
She says, "You have to jump into disaster with both
feet."
She throws the broken heels into the bathroom trash.

"I'm not straight, and I'm not gay," she says. "I'm not
bisexual. I want out of the labels. I don't want my whole life
crammed into a single word. A story. I want to find
something else, unknowable, some place to be that's not on
the map. A real adventure."
A sphinx. A mystery. A blank. Unknown. Undefined.
Unknowable. Indefinable. Those were all the words Brandy
used to describe me in my veils. Not just a story that goes and
then, and then, and then, and then until you die.
"When I met you," she says, "I envied you. I coveted your
face. I thought that face of yours will take more guts than any
sex change operation. It will give you bigger discoveries. It will
make you stronger than I could ever be."
I start down the stairs. Brandy in her new flats, me in my
total confusion, we get to the foyer, and through the
drawing room doors you can hear Mr. Parker's long, deep voice
belching over and over, "That's right. Just do that."
Brandy and me, we stand outside the doors a moment. We
pick the lint and toilet paper off each other, and I fluff up the
flat back of Brandy's hair. Brandy pulls her pantyhose up her
legs a little and tugs down the front of her jacket.
The postcard and the book tucked inside her jacket, the
dick tucked in her pantyhose, you can't tell either one's there.
We throw open the drawing room double doors and
there's Mr. Parker and Ellis. Mr. Parker's pants are around his
knees, his bare hairy ass is stuck up in the air. The rest of his
bareness is stuck in Ellis's face. Ellis Island, formerly
Independent Special Contract Vice Operative Manus Kelley.
"Oh, yes. Just do that. That's so good."
Ellis's getting an A in job performance, his hands are
cupped around Parker's football scholarship power-clean bare

buns, pulling everything he can swallow into his square-
jawed Nazi poster boy face. Ellis grunting and gagging, making

his comeback from forced retirement.
CHAPTER T W E N T Y - S E V E N
The man at General Delivery who asked to see my ID pretty
much had to take my word for it. The picture on my driver's license
might as well be Brandy's. This means a lot of writing on scraps of
paper for me to explain how I look now. This whole time I'm in
the post office, I'm looking sideways to see if I'm a cover girl up on
the FBI's most wanted poster board.
Almost half a million dollars is about twenty-five pounds of
ten- and twenty-dollar bills in a box. Plus, inside with the money is
a pink stationery note from Evie saying blah, blah, blah, I will kill
you if I ever see you again. And I couldn't be happier.
Before Brandy can see who it's addressed to, I claw off the label.
One part of being a model is my phone number was unlisted so
I wasn't in any city for Brandy to find. I was nowhere. And now
we're driving back to Evie. To Brandy's fate. The whole way back,
me and Ellis, we're writing postcards from the future and slipping
them out the car windows as we go south on Interstate 5 at a mile
and a half every minute. Three miles closer to Evie and her rifle
every two minutes. Ninety miles closer to fate every hour.
Ellis writes: Your birth is a mistake you'll spend your whole life
trying to correct.
The electric window of the Lincoln Town Car hums down a half

inch, and Ellis drops the card out into the I-5 slipstream.
I write: You spend your entire life becoming God and then you
die.
Ellis writes: When you don't share your problems, you resent
hearing the problems of other people.
I write: All God does is watch us and kill us when we get boring.
We must never, ever be boring.
Jump to us reading the real estate section of the newspaper,
looking for big open houses. We always do this in a new town. We
sit at a nice sidewalk cafe and drink cappuccino with chocolate
sprinkles and read the paper, then
Brandy calls all the realtors to find which open houses
have people still living in them. Ellis makes a list of houses to
hit tomorrow.
We check into a nice hotel, and we take a cat nap. After
midnight Brandy wakes me up with a kiss. She and Ellis are
going out to sell the stock we picked up in Seattle. Probably
they're screwing. I don't care.
"And no," Brandy says. "Miss Alexander will not be calling
the Rhea sisters while she's in town. Anymore, she's
determined the only vagina worth having is the kind you buy
yourself."
Ellis is standing in the open doorway to the hotel hallway,
looking like a superhero that I want to crawl in to bed and
save me. Still, since Seattle, he's been my brother. And you
can't be in love with your brother.
Brandy says, "You want the TV remote control?" Brandy
turns on the television, and there's Evie scared and
desperate with her big pumped-up rainbow hair in every
shade of blonde. Evelyn Cottrell, Inc., everybody's favorite
writeoff, is stumbling through the studio audience in her
sequined dress begging folks to eat her meat by-products.
Brandy changes channels.
Brandy changes channels.
Brandy changes channels.
Evie is everywhere after midnight, offering what she's got
on a silver tray. The studio audience ignores her,
watching themselves on the monitor, trapped in the reality loop of
watching themselves watch themselves, trying the way we do every
time we look in a mirror to figure out exactly who that person is.
That loop that never ends. Evie and me, we did this infomercial.
How could I be so dumb? We're so totally trapped in ourselves.
The camera stays on Evie, and what I can almost hear Evie saying
is, Love me.
Love me, love me, love me, love me, love me, love me, love me,
I'll be anybody you want me to be. Use me. Change me. I can be
thin with big breasts and big hair. Take me apart. Make me into
anything, but just love me.
Jump way back to one time, Evie and me did this fashion shoot
in a junk yard, in a slaughterhouse, in a mortuary. We'd go
anywhere to look good by comparison, and what I realize is mostly
what I hate about Evie is the fact that she's so vain and stupid and
needy. But what I hate most is how she's just like me. What I really
hate is me so I hate pretty much everybody.
Jump to the next day we hit a few houses, a mansion, a couple
palaces, and a chateau full of drugs. Around three o'clock we meet

a realtor in the baronial dining room of a West Hills manor house. All
around us are caterers and florists. The dining room table is spread
and heaping with silver and crystal, tea sets, samovars,
candelabras, stemware. A woman in dowdy scarecrow social
secretary tweeds is unwrapping these gifts of silver and crystal
and making notes in a tiny red book.
A constant stream of arriving flowers eddies around us,
buckets of irises and roses and stock. The manor house is sweet
with the smell of flowers and rich with the smell of little puff
pastries and stuffed mushrooms.
Not our style. Brandy looks at me. Way too many folks
around.
But the realtor's already there, smiling, fn a drawl as flat
and drawn-out as the Texas horizon, the realtor introduces
herself as Mrs. Leonard Cottrell. And she is so happy to meet
us.
This Cottrell woman takes Brandy by the elbow and steers
her around the baronial first floor while I decide to fight or
flight.
Give me terror.
Flash.
Give me panic.
Flash.
This has to be Evie's mother, oh, you know it is. And this
must be Evie's new house. And I'm wondering how it is we
came here. Why today? What are the chances?
The realty Cottrell steers us past the tweedy social secretary
and all the wedding gifts. "This is my daughter's house. But
she spends almost all her days in the furniture department at
Brumbach's, downtown. So far we've gone along with her little
obsessions, but enough's enough, so now we're gonna marry her
off to some jackass."
She leans in close, "It was more difficult than you'd ever
imagine, trying to settle her down. You know, she burned down the
last house we bought her."
Beside the social secretary, there's a stack of gold-engraved
wedding invitations. These are the regrets. Sorry, but we can't
make it.
There seem to be a lot of regrets. Nice invitations, though, gold
engraved, hand-torn edges, a three-fold card with a dried violet
inside. I steal one of the regrets, and I catch up with the realty
Cottrell woman and Brandy and Ellis.
"No," Brandy's saying, "there are too many people around. We
couldn't view the house under these conditions."
"Between you and me," says the realty Cottrell, "The biggest
wedding in the world is worth the cost if we can shove Evie off
onto some poor man."
Brandy says, "We don't want to keep you."
"But, then," the Cottrell woman says, "there's this subgroup of
'men' who like their 'women' the way Evie is now."
Brandy says, "We really must be going."
And Ellis says, "Men who like insane women?"
"Why, it plum broke our hearts the day Evan came to us. Sixteen
years old, and he says 'Mommy, Daddy, I want to be a girl'," says Mrs.
Cottrell.
"But we paid for it," she says. "A tax deduction is a tax
deduction. Evan wanted to be a world-famous fashion model,

he told us. He started calling himself Evie, and I canceled my
subscription to Vogue the next day. I felt it had done enough
damage to my family."
Brandy says, "Well, congratulations," and starts tugging
me toward the front door.
And Ellis says, "Evie was a man? "
Evie was a man. And I just have to sit down. Evie was a
man. And I saw her implant scars. Evie was a man. And I saw
her naked in fitting rooms.
Give me a complete late-stage revision of my adult life.
Flash.
Give me anything in this whole fucking world that is
exactly what it looks like!
Flash!
Evie's mother looks hard at Brandy, "Have you ever done
any modeling?" she says. "You look so much like a friend of
my son's."
"Your daughter," Brandy growls.
And I finger the invitation I stole. The wedding, the
union of Miss Evelyn Cottrell and Mr. Allen Skinner, is
tomorrow. At eleven ante meridiem, according to the gold
engraving. To be followed by a reception at the bride's home.
To be followed by a house fire.
To be followed by a murder.
Dress formal.
CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT
My dress I carry my ass around Evie's wedding in is tighter

than skin tight. It's what you'd call bone tight. It's that knock-
off print of the Shroud of Turin, most of it brown and white,

draped and cut so the shiny red buttons all button through
the stigmata. Then I'm wearing yards and yards of black silk
gloves bunched up on my arms. My heels are nosebleed high. I
wrap Brandy's half mile of black tulle studded with sparkle up
around my scar tissue, over the shining cherry pie where my
face used to be, wrapped tight, until only my eyes are out. It's
a look that's bleak and morbid. The feeling is we've got a
little out of control.
It takes more effort to hate Evie than it used to. My
whole life is moving farther away from any reason to hate her.
It's moving far away from reason itself. It takes a cup of coffee
and a Dexedrine capsule to feel even vaguely pissed about
anything.
Brandy, she wears the knock-off Bob Mackie suit with the
little peplum skirt and the big, I don't know, and the thin,
narrow I couldn't care less. She wears a hat, since it's a
wedding, after all. Got some shoes on her feet made from
the skin of some animal. Accessorized including jewelry, you
know, stones dug out of the earth, polished and cut to reflect
light, set in alloys of gold and copper, atomic weight, melted
and beat with hammers, all of it so labor intensive. Meaning,
all of Brandy Alexander.
Ellis, he wears a double-breasted, whatever, a suit, a single
vent in the back, black. He looks the way you'd imagine
yourself dead in a casket if you're a guy, not a problem for
me, since Ellis has outlived his role in my life.

Ellis's strutting around now that he's proved he can
seduce something in every category. Not that knobbing Mr.
Parker makes him King of Fag Town, but now he's got Evie
under his belt, and maybe enough time's gone by Ellis can go
back on duty, get his old beat back in Washington Park.
So we take the gold-engraved wedding invitation that I
stole, Brandy and Ellis each take a Percodan, and we go to Evie's
wedding reception moment.
Jump to eleven o'clock ante meridiem at the baronial West Hills
manor house of crazy Evie Cottrell, gun-happy Evie, newly united
Mrs. Evelyn Cottrell Skinner, as if I could care at this point. And. This
is oh so dazzling. Evie, she could be the wedding cake, in tier on
tier of sashes and flowers rising around her big hoop skirt, up and
up to her cinched waist, then her big Texas breasts popped out the
top of a strapless bodice. There's so much of her to decorate, the
same as Christmas at a shopping mall. Silk flowers are bunched at
one side of her waist. Silk flowers over both ears anchor a veil
thrown back over her blonde on blonde sprayed-up hair. In that
hoop skirt and those pushed-up Texas grapefruit, the girl walks
around riding her own parade float.
Full of Champagne and Percodan interactions, Brandy is looking
at me.
And I'm amazed I never saw it before, how Evie was a man. A
big blonde, the same as she is here, but with one of those ugly
wrinkled, you know, scrotums.
Ellis is hiding from Evie, trying to scope out if her new husband
as yet another notch in his special contract vice operative resume.
Ellis, how this story looks from his point of view is he's still major
sport bait winning proof he can bust any man after the long fight.
Everybody here thinks the whole story is about them. Definitely that
goes for everybody in the world.
Oh, and this is gone way beyond sorry, Mom. Sorry,
God. At this point, I'm not sorry for anything. Or anybody.
No, really, everybody here's just itching to be cremated.
Jump to upstairs. In the master bedroom, Evie's
trousseau is laid out ready to be packed. I brought my own
matches this time, and I light the hand-torn edge of the
gold-engraved invitation, and I carry the invitation from the
bedspread to the trousseau to the curtains. It's the sweetest
of moments when the fire takes control, and you're no
longer responsible for anything.
I take a big bottle of Chanel Number Five from Evie's
bathroom and a big bottle of Joy and a big bottle of White
Shoulders, and I slosh the smell of a million parade float
flowers all over the bedroom.
The fire, Evie's wedding inferno finds the trail of flowers in
alcohol and chases me out into the hallway. That's what I
love about fire, how it would kill me as quick as anybody
else. How it can't know I'm its mother. It's so beautiful and
powerful and beyond feeling anything for anybody, that's
what I love about fire.
You can't stop any of this. You can't control. The fire in
Evie's clothes is just more and more every second, and now
the plot moves along without you pushing.
And I descend. Step-pause-step. The invisible showgirl. For
once, what's happening is what I want. Even better than I

expected. Nobody's noticed.
Our world is speeding straight ahead into the future.
Flowers and stuffed mushrooms, wedding guests and
string quartet, we're all going there together on the
Planet Brandy Alexander. In the front hall, there's the
Princess Princess thinking she's still in control.
The feeling is of supreme and ultimate control over all.
Jump to the day we'll all be dead and none of this will
matter. Jump to the day another house will stand here and the
people living there won't know we ever happened.
"Where did you go?" Brandy says.
The immediate future, I would tell her.
CHAPTER T W E N T Y - N I N E
Jump to Brandy and me, we can't find Ellis anywhere. Evie
and all the Texas Cottrells can't find their groom, either,
everybody laughing that nervous laughter. What bridesmaid
has run off with him, everybody wants to know. Ha, ha.
I tug Brandy toward the door, but she shushes me. Ellis and
the groom both missing ... a hundred Texans drinking hard . .
. that ridiculous bride in her big drag wedding dress . . . this is
just too much fun for Brandy to walk out now.
Jump to Evie riding her big parade float out of the butler's
pantry, her hands all fisted up, her veil and hair flying
straight out behind her. Evie's shouting about how she done
found her butt-sucking fag-assed new husband face-downed
enjoying butt sex with everybody's old boyfriend in the
butler's pantry.
Oh, Ellis.
I remember all his porno magazines, and all the details of
anal, oral, rimming, fisting, felching. You could put yourself
in the hospital trying to self-suck.
Oh, this is dazzling.
Of course, Evie's answer to everything is to heft her hoop
skirt and run upstairs after a rifle except by now most of her
bedroom is a Chanel Number Five perfumed wall of flames Evie
has to ride her parade float right into. Everybody cell phones 9-
1-1 for help. Nobody's bothered enough to go into the butler's
pantry and check out the action. Folks don't want to know
what might be going on in there.
Go figure, but Texans seem to be a lot more comfortable
around disastrous house fires than they are around anal sex.
I remember my folks. Scat and water sports. Sado and
masochism.
Waiting for Evie to burn to death, everybody gets a fresh
drink and goes to stand in the foyer at the foot of the stairs.
You hear loud spanking from the butler's pantry. The painful
kind where you spit on your hand first.
Brandy, the socially inappropriate thing she is, Brandy
starts laughing. "This is going to be messy good fun," Brandy
tells me out the side of her Plumbago mouth. "I put a
handful of Bilax bowel evacuant in Ellis's last drink."
Oh, Ellis.
With all that's going on, Brandy could've gotten away if
she hadn't started laughing.
You see, since right then, Evie steps out of that wall of

flame at the top of the stairs. A rifle in her hands, her
wedding dress burned down to the steel hoops, the silk
flowers in her hair burned down to their wire skeletons, all

her blonde hair burned off, Evie does her slow step-pause-
step down the stairs with a rifle pointed right at Brandy

Alexander.
With everybody looking up the stairs at Evie wearing
nothing but wire and ashes, sweat and soot smeared all over
her lucious hourglass transgender bod, we all watch Evelyn
Cottrell in her big incorporated moment, and Evie screams,
"You!"
She screams at Brandy Alexander down the barrel of the
rifle, "You did it to me again. Another fire!"
Step-pause-step.
"I thought we were best friends," she says. "Sure, yes, I slept
with your boyfriend, but who hasn't?" Evie says, with the gun
and everything.
Step-pause-step.
"It's just not enough for you to be the best and most
beautiful," Evie says. "Most people, if they looked as good as
you, they'd tread water for the rest of their lives."
Step-pause-step.
"But no," Evie says, "Here you have to destroy everyone else."
The second floor fire inches down the foyer wallpaper, and
wedding guests are scrambling for their wraps and bags, all of them
headed outdoors with the wedding gifts, the silver and the crystal.
You hear that butt slapping sound from the butler's pantry.
"Shut up in there!" Evie yells. Back to Brandy, Evie says, "So
maybe I'll spend some years in prison, but you'll have a big head
start on me in hell!"
You hear the rifle cock.
The fire inches down the walls.
"Oh, God, yes, Jesus Christ," Ellis yells. "Oh, God, I'm coming!"
Brandy stops laughing. Bigger and prettier than ever, looking
regal and annoyed and put-upon as if this is all a big joke, Brandy
Alexander lifts a giant hand and looks at her watch.
And I'm about to become an only child.
And I could stop everything at this moment. I could throw off
my veil, tell the truth, save lives. I'm me. Brandy's innocent. Here's
my second chance. I could've opened my bedroom window years
ago and let Shane inside. I could've not called the police all those
times to suggest Shane's accident wasn't. What stands in my way is
the story how Shane burned my clothes. How being mutilated made
Shane the center of attention. And if I throw off my veil now, I'll
just be a monster, a less than perfect, mutilated victim. I'll be
only how I look. Just the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth. Honesty being the most boring
thing in the planet Brandy Alexander.
And. Evie aims.
"Yes!" Ellis yells from the pantry. "Yes, do it, big guy! Give
it to me! Shoot it!"
Evie squints down the barrel.
"Now!" Ellis is yelling. "Shoot it right in my mouth!"
Brandy smiles.
And I do nothing.
And Evie shoots Brandy Alexander right in the heart.

CHAPTER T H I R T Y
My life," Brandy says. "I'm dying, and I'm supposed to see my
whole life."
Nobody's dying here. Give me denial.
Evie's shot her wad, dropped the rifle, and gone outside.
The police and paramedics are on their way, and the rest of the
wedding guests are outside fighting over the wedding gifts, who
gave what and who now has the right to take it back. All of it good
messy fun.
Blood is pretty much all over Brandy Alexander, and she says, "I
want to see my life."
From some back room, Ellis says, "You have the right to remain
silent.”
Jump to me, I let go from holding Brandy's hand, my
hand warm red with blood-born pathogens, I write on the
burning wallpaper.
Your Name Is Shane McFarland.
You Were Born Twenty-Four Years Ago.
You Have A Sister, One Year Younger.
The fire's already eating my top line.
You Got Gonorrhea From A Special Contract Vice
Operative And Your Family Threw You Out.
You Met Three Drag Queens Who Paid You To Start A
Sex Change Because You Couldn't Think Of Anything You
Wanted Less.
The fire's already eating my second line.
You Met Me.
I Am Your Sister, Shannon McFarland.
Me writing the truth in blood just minutes ahead of the
fire eating it.
You Loved Me Because Even If You Didn't Recognize
Me, You Knew I Was Your Sister. On Some Level, You Knew
Right Away So You Loved Me.
We traveled all over the West and grew up together
again.
I've hated you for as long as I can remember.
And You Are Not Going To Die.
I could've saved you.
And you are not going to die.
The fire and my writing are now neck and neck.
Jump to Brandy half-bled on the floor, most of her blood
wiped up by me to write with, Brandy squints to read as the fire
eats our whole family history, line by line. The line And You Are Not
Going To Die is almost at the floor, right in Brandy's face.
"Honey," Brandy says, "Shannon, sweetness, I knew all that. It
was Miss Evie's doing. She told me about you being in the
hospital. About your accident."
Such a hand model I am already. And such a rube.
"Now," Brandy says. "Tell me everything."
I write: I've Been Feeding Ellis Island Female Hormones For
The Past Eight Months.
And Brandy laughs blood. "Me too!" she says.
How can I not laugh?
"Now," Brandy says, "quick, before I die, what else?"
I write: Everybody Just Loved You More After The Hairspray

Accident.
And:
And I Did Not Make That Hairspray Can Explode.
Brandy says, "I know. I did it. I was so miserable being a normal
average child. I wanted something to save me. I wanted the
opposite of a miracle."
From some other room, Ellis says, "Anything you say can and
may be used against you in a court of law." And on the baseboard, I
write:
The Truth Is I Shot Myself In The Face.
There's no more room to write, no more blood to write
with, and nothing left to say, and Brandy says, "You shot your
own face off?"
I nod.
"That," says Brandy, "that, I didn't know.”
CHAPTER T H I R T Y - O N E
Jump to this one time, nowhere special, just Brandy almost
dead on the floor and me kneeling over her -with my hands covered
in her Princess Alexander partytime blood.
Brandy yells, "Evie!"
And Evie's burned-up head sticks back in through the front
doorway. "Brandy, sugar," Evie says, "This all's been the best disaster
you've ever pulled off!"
To me, Evie runs up and kisses me with her nasty melted lipstick
and says, "Shannon, I just can't thank you enough for spicing up
my boring old home life."
"Miss Evie," Brandy says, "you can act like anything, but, girl,
you just totally missed shooting the bulletproof part of my
vest."
Jump to the truth. I'm the stupid one.
Jump to the truth. I shot myself. I let Evie think it was
Manus and Manus think it was Evie. Probably it was their
suspicion of each other that drove them apart. It drove Evie
to keep a loaded rifle around in case Manus came after her.
The same fear made Manus carry a butcher knife the night
he came over to confront her.
The truth is nobody here is as stupid or evil as I let on.
Except me. The truth is I drove out away from the city on the
day of the accident. With my driver's side window rolled
halfway up, I got out and I shot through the glass. On the
way back into town, on the freeway, I got in the exit lane for
Growden Avenue, the exit for La Paloma Memorial Hospital.
The truth is I was addicted to being beautiful, and that's
not something you just walk away from. Being addicted to
all that attention, I had to quit cold turkey. I could shave my
head, but hair grows back. Even bald, I might still look too
good. Bald, I might get even more attention. There was the
option of getting fat or drinking out of control to ruin my
looks, but I wanted to be ugly, and I wanted my health.
Wrinkles and aging looked too far off. There had to be some
way to get ugly in a flash. I had to deal with my looks in a fast,
permanent way or I'd always be tempted to go back.
You know how you look at ugly hunchback girls, and they
are so lucky. Nobody drags them out at night so they can't
finish their doctorate thesis papers. They don't get yelled at

by fashion photographers if they get infected ingrown bikini
hairs. You look at burn victims and think how much time they
save not looking in mirrors to check their skin for sun damage.
I wanted the everyday reassurance of being mutilated. The
way a crippled deformed birth-defected disfigured girl can
drive her car with the windows open and not care how the
wind makes her hair look, that's the kind of freedom I was
after.
I was tired of staying a lower life form just because of my
looks. Trading on them. Cheating. Never getting anything real
accomplished, but getting the attention and recognition
anyway. Trapped in a beauty ghetto is how I felt. Stereotyped.
Robbed of my motivation.
In this way, Shane, we are very much brother and sister.
This is the biggest mistake I could think would save me. I
wanted to give up the idea I had any control. Shake things up.
To be saved by chaos. To see if I could cope, I wanted to force
myself to grow again. To explode my comfort zone.
I slowed down for the exit and pulled over onto the
shoulder, what they call the breakdown lane. I remember
thinking, how apropos. I remember thinking, this is going to
be so exciting. My makeover. Here was my life about to start all
over again. I could be a great brain surgeon this time around.
Or I could be an artist. Nobody would care how I'd look.
People would just see my art, what I made instead of just how
I looked, and people would love me.
What I thought last was, at last I'll be growing again,
mutating, adapting, evolving. I'll be physically challenged.

I couldn't wait. I got the gun from the glove compart-
ment. I wore a glove against powder burns, and held the gun

at arm's length out my broken window. It wasn't even like
aiming with the gun only about two feet away. I might've
killed myself that way, but by now that idea didn't seem very
tragic.
This makeover would make piercings and tattoos and
brandings look so lame, all those little fashion revolts so safe
that they themselves only become fashionable. Those little
paper tiger attempts to reject looking good that only end up
reinforcing it.
The shot, it was like getting hit hard is what I remember.
The bullet. It took a minute before I could focus my eyes, but
there was my blood and snot, my drool and teeth all over the
passenger seat. I had to open the car door and get the gun
from where I'd dropped it outside the window. Being in shock
helped. The gun and the glove's in a storm drain in the
hospital parking lot where I dropped them, in case you want
proof.
Then the intravenous morphine, the tiny operating
room manicure scissors cut my dress off, the little patch
panties, the police photos. Birds ate my face. Nobody ever
suspected the truth.
The truth is I panicked a little after that. I let everybody
think the wrong things. The future is not a good place to
start lying and cheating all over again. None of this is
anybody's fault except mine. I ran because just getting my jaw
rebuilt was too much temptation to revert, to play that game,
the looking good game. Now my whole new future is still out

there waiting for me.
The truth is, being ugly isn't the thrill you'd think, but it
can be an opportunity for something better than I ever
imagined.
The truth is I'm sorry.
CHAPTER T H I R T Y - T W O
Jump back to the La Paloma emergency room. The
intravenous morphine. The tiny operating room manicure
scissors cut Brandy's suit off. My brother's unhappy penis there
blue and cold for the whole world to see. The police photos,
and Sister Katherine screaming, "Take your pictures! Take your
pictures now! He's still losing blood!"
Jump to surgery. Jump to post-op. Jump to me taking
Sister Katherine aside, little Sister Katherine hugging me so
hard around the knees I almost buckle to the floor. She looks
at me, both of us stained with the blood, and I ask her in
writing:
please.
do this one special thing for me. please, if you really
want to make me happy.
Jump to Evie installed talk-show—style under the hot
track lights, downtown at Brumbach's, chatting with her
mother and Manus and her new husband about how she met
Brandy years before all of us, in some transgender support
group. About how everybody needs a big disaster every now
and then.
Jump to some day down the road soon when Manus will
get his breasts.
Jump to me kneeling beside my brother's hospital bed.
Shane's skin, you don't know where the faded blue hospital
gown ends and Shane begins, he's so pale. This is my brother,
thin and pale with Shane's thin arms and pigeon chest. The
flat auburn hair across his forehead, this is who I remember
growing up with. Put together out of sticks and bird bones.
The Shane I'd forgotten. The Shane from before the hairspray
accident. I don't know why I forgot, but Shane had always
looked so miserable.
Jump to our folks at home at night, showing home
movies against the side of their white house. The windows
from twenty years ago lined up perfect with the windows
now. The grass lined up with the grass. The ghosts of
Shane and me as toddlers running around, happy with each
other.
Jump to the Rhea sisters crowded around the hospital bed.
Hairnets pulled on over their wigs. Surgical masks on their
faces. They're wearing those faded green scrub suits, the Rheas
have those Duchess of Windsor costume jewelry brooches
pinned on their scrubs: leopards shimmering with diamond
and topaz spots. Hummingbirds with pave emerald bodies.
Me, I just want Shane to be happy. I'm tired of being me,
hateful me.
Give me release.
I'm tired of this world of appearances. Pigs that only look
fat. Families that look happy.
Give me deliverance.
From what only looks like generosity. What only looks like

love.
Flash.
I don't want to be me anymore. I want to be happy, and I
want Brandy Alexander back. Here's my first real dead end in
my life. There's nowhere to go, not the way I am right now,
the person I am. Here's my first real beginning.

As Shane sleeps, the Rhea sisters all crowd around, dec-
orating him with little gifts. They're misting Shane with L'Air

du Temps as if he were a Boston fern.
New earrings. A new Hermes scarf around his head.
Cosmetics are spread in perfect rows on a surgical tray that
hovers next to the bed, and Sofonda says, "Moisturizer!" and
holds her hand out, palm up.
"Moisturizer," Kitty Litter says, and slaps the tube into Sofonda's
palm.
Sofonda puts her hand out and says, "Concealer!" And
Vivienne slaps another tube into her palm and says, "Concealer."
Shane, I know you can't hear, but that's okay, since I can't talk.
With short, light strokes, Sofonda uses a little sponge to spread
concealer on the dark bags under Shane's eyes. Vivienne pins a
diamond stick pin on Shane's hospital gown.
Miss Rona saved your life, Shane. The book in your jacket
pocket, it slowed the bullet enough that only your boobs exploded.
It's just a flesh wound, flesh and sili-cone.
Florists come in with sprays of irises and roses and stock.
Your silicone broke, Shane. The bullet popped your sil-icone so
they had to take it out. Now you can have any sized breasts you
want. The Rheas have said so.
"Foundation!" Sofonda says, blending the foundation into
Shane's hairline.
She says, "Eyebrow pencil!" with sweat beading on her forehead.
Kitty hands over the pencil, saying, "Eyebrow pencil." "Blot
me!" Sofonda says.
And Vivienne blots her forehead with a sponge. Sofonda
says, "Eyeliner! STAT!"
And I have to go, Shane, while you're still asleep. But I
want to give you something. I want to give you life. This is my
third chance, and I don't want to blow it. I could've opened
my bedroom window. I could've stopped Evie shooting you.
The truth is I didn't so I'm giving you my life because I don't
want it anymore.
I tuck my clutch bag under Shane's big ring-beaded hand.
You see, the size of a man's hands are the one thing a plastic
surgeon can't change. The one thing that will always give
away a girl like Brandy Alexander. There's just no way to hide
those hands.
This is all my identification, my birth certificate, my
everything. You can be Shannon McFarland from now on. My
career. The ninety-degree attention. It's yours. All of it.
Everyone. I hope it's enough for you. It's everything I have
left.
"Base color!" Sofonda says, and Vivienne hands her the
lightest shade of Aubergine Dreams eye shadow.
"Lid color!" Sofonda says, and Kitty hands her the next eye
shadow.
"Contour color!" Sofonda says, and Kitty hands her the
darkest shade.

Shane, you go back to my career. You make Sofonda get
you a top contract, no local charity benefit runway shit.
You're Shannon fucking McFarland now. You go right to the
top. A year from now, I want to turn on the TV and see you
drinking a diet cola naked in slow motion. Make Sofonda get
you big national contracts.
Be famous. Be a big social experiment in getting what you
don't want. Find value in what we've been taught is
worthless. Find good in what the world says is evil. I'm giving
you my life because I want the whole world to know you. I
wish the whole world would embrace what it hates.
Find what you're afraid of most and go live there.
"Lash Curler!" says Sofonda, and she curls Shane's sleeping
eyelashes.
"Mascara!" she says, combing mascara into the lashes.
"Exquisite," says Kitty.
And Sofonda says, "We're not out of the woods yet."
Shane, I'm giving you my life, my driver's license, my old
report cards, because you look more like me than I can ever
remember looking. Because I'm tired of hating and preening
and telling myself old stories that were never true in the first
place. I'm tired of always being me, me, me first.
Mirror, mirror on the wall.
And please don't come after me. Be the new center of
attention. Be a big success, be beautiful and loved and
everything else I wanted to be. I'm over that now. I just want
to be invisible. Maybe I'll become a belly dancer in my veils.
Become a nun and work in a leper colony where nobody is
complete. I'll be an ice hockey goalie and wear a mask. Those
big amusement parks will only hire women to wear the
cartoon character costumes, since folks don't want to chance
a strange molester guy hugging their kid. Maybe I'll be a big
cartoon mouse. Or a dog. Or a duck. I don't know, but I'm
sure I'll find out. There's no escaping fate, it just keeps
going. Day and night, the future just keeps coming at you.
I stroke Shane's pale hand.
I'm giving you my life to prove to myself I can, I really can
love somebody. Even when I'm not getting paid, I can give
love and happiness and charm. You see, I can handle the baby
food and the not talking and being homeless and invisible,
but I have to know that I can love somebody. Completely and
totally, permanently and without hope of reward, just as an act
of will, I will love somebody.
I lean in, as if I could kiss my brother's face.
I leave my purse and any idea of who I am tucked under
Shane's hand. And I leave behind the story that I was ever this
beautiful, that I could walk into a room deep fried in a tight
dress and everybody would turn and look at me. A million
reporters would take my picture. And I leave behind the idea
that this attention was worth what I did to get it.
What I need is a new story.
What the Rhea sisters did for Brandy Alexander.
What Brandy's been doing for me.
What I need to learn to do for myself. To write my own
story.
Let my brother be Shannon McFarland.
I don't need that kind of attention. Not anymore.

"Lip liner!" Sofonda says.
"Lip gloss!" she says.
She says, "We've got a bleeder!"
And Vivienne leans in with a tissue to blot the extra
Plumbago off Shane's chin.
Sister Katherine brings me what I asked for, please, and it's
the pictures, the eight-by-ten glossies of me in my white
sheet. They aren't good or bad, ugly or beautiful. They're just
the way I look. The truth. My future. Just regular reality. And
I take off my veils, the cut-work and muslin and lace, and
leave them for Shane to find at his feet.
I don't need them at this moment, or the next, or the
next, forever.
Sofonda sets the make-up with powder and then Shane's
gone. My brother, thin and pale, sticks and bird bones and
miserable, is gone.
The Rhea sisters slowly peel off their surgical masks.
"Brandy Alexander," says Kitty, "queen supreme."
"Total quality girl," Vivienne says.
"Forever and ever," says Sofonda, "and that's enough."
Completely and totally, permanently and without hope,
forever and ever I love Brandy Alexander. And that's enough.
